<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England</title>
      <author><name reg="Bede">Bede</name></author>
      <respStmt><resp>Translated by</resp> <name>A. M. Sellar</name></respStmt>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>December 17, 2011</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">38326</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="cy"></language>
      <language id="ga"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2011-12-17">December 17, 2011</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Carla Foust, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This book was produced from scanned images of
            public domain material from the Google Print project.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">A Revised Translation</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">With Introduction, Life, and Notes</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">A. M. Sellar</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Late Vice-Principal of Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">London</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">George Bell and Sons</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1907</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Editor's Preface</head>

<p>
The English version of the <q>Ecclesiastical History</q>
in the following pages is a revision of the translation
of Dr. Giles, which is itself a revision of the earlier
rendering of Stevens. In the present edition very considerable
alterations have been made, but the work of
Dr. Giles remains the basis of the translation. The Latin
text used throughout is Mr. Plummer's. Since the edition
of Dr. Giles appeared in 1842, so much fresh work
on the subject has been done, and recent research has
brought so many new facts to light, that it has been
found necessary to rewrite the notes almost entirely, and
to add a new introduction. After the appearance of Mr.
Plummer's edition of the Historical Works of Bede, it
might seem superfluous, for the present at least, to write
any notes at all on the <q>Ecclesiastical History.</q> The present
volume, however, is intended to fulfil a different and
much humbler function. There has been no attempt at
any original work, and no new theories are advanced.
The object of the book is merely to present in a short
and convenient form the substance of the views held by
trustworthy authorities, and it is hoped that it may be
found useful by those students who have either no time
or no inclination to deal with more important works.
</p>

<p>
Among the books of which most use has been made,
are Mr. Plummer's edition of the <q>Ecclesiastical History,</q>
<pb n='vi'/><anchor id='Pgvi'/>
Messrs. Mayor and Lumby's edition of Books III and
IV, Dr. Bright's <q>Early English Church History,</q> and
Dr. Hunt's <q>History of the English Church from its
foundation to the Norman Conquest.</q> Many of the
articles in the <q>Dictionary of Christian Biography</q> and
the <q>Dictionary of Christian Antiquities,</q> Dr. Mason's
<q>Mission of St. Augustine,</q> Dr. Rhŷs's <q>Celtic Britain,</q>
and a number of other books, mentioned in the notes,
have been consulted.
</p>

<p>
For help received in different ways I wish to express
my gratitude to various correspondents and friends. I
am particularly indebted to Mr. Edward Bell, who has
kindly revised my proofs and made many valuable suggestions.
For information on certain points I have to
thank the Rev. Charles Plummer, Fellow of Corpus
Christi College, Oxford, Professor Lindsay of St. Andrews
University, Miss Wordsworth, Principal, and Miss
Lodge, Vice-Principal of Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford;
and in a very special sense I wish to acknowledge my
obligations to Miss Paterson, Assistant Librarian at the
University Library, St. Andrews, whose unfailing kindness
in verifying references, and supplying me with
books, has greatly lightened my labours.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='xix'/><anchor id='Pgxix'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Introduction</head>

<p>
There are, it has been estimated, in England and
on the Continent, in all about 140 manuscripts of
the <q>Ecclesiastical History.</q> Of these, four date from the
eighth century: the Moore MS. (Cambridge), so called,
because, after being sold by auction in the reign of
William III, it came into the possession of Bishop
Moore, who bequeathed it to the University of Cambridge;
Cotton, Tiberius A, xiv; Cotton, Tiberius C,
ii; and the Namur MS. A detailed account of these, as
well as of a great number of other manuscripts, will be
found in Mr. Plummer's Introduction to his edition of
Bede's Historical Works. He has been the first to collate
the four oldest MSS., besides examining numerous others
and collating them in certain passages. He has pointed
out that two of the MSS. dating from the eighth century
(the century in which Bede died), the Moore MS.
and Cotton, Tiberius A, xiv, point to a common original
which cannot be far removed from Bede's autograph.
We are thus brought very near to our author, and may
have more than in most cases the assurance that we have
before us what he actually meant to say.
</p>

<p>
The earliest editions were printed on the Continent;
the <q>editio princeps</q> is believed to date from 1475. A
number of editions followed in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries; the first in England was published by
Abraham Whelock at Cambridge in 1643-4. Smith's
<pb n='xx'/><anchor id='Pgxx'/>
edition in 1722 marked a new era in the history of the
book. It was the first critical edition, the text being
based on the Moore MS. collated with three others, of
which two were eighth century MSS.; and succeeding
editors, Stevenson (1841), Giles (1842), Hussey (1846),
the editor in the <q>Monumenta Historica Britannica</q>
(1848), Moberly (1869), Holder (1882), base their work
mainly on Smith's. Mr. Mayor and Mr. Lumby together
edited Books III and IV with excellent notes in 1878.
Their text <q>reproduces exactly the Moore MS.</q> which
they collated with some other Cambridge MSS. (cf.
Mayor and Lumby, Excursus II). In 1896 the Rev. C.
Plummer published his edition of Bede's Historical Works,
the first critical edition since Smith's, and <q>the very first
which exhibits in an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>apparatus criticus</foreign> the various readings
of the MSS. on which the text is based.</q> For the
student of Bede this admirable book is of the highest
value, and the labours of all succeeding editors are made
comparatively light. Besides the most minute and accurate
work on the text, it contains a copious and interesting
commentary and the fullest references to the
various sources upon which the editor has drawn.
</p>

<p>
The first translation of the <q>Ecclesiastical History</q> is
the Anglo-Saxon version, executed either by Alfred himself
or under his immediate supervision. Of this version
Dr. Hodgkin says: <q>As this book had become a kind
of classic among churchmen, Alfred allowed himself here
less liberty than in some of his other translations. Some
letters, epitaphs, and similar documents are omitted,
and there is an almost complete erasure of the chapters
relating to the wearisome Paschal controversy. In other
respects the king's translation seems to be a fairly accurate
reproduction of the original work.</q> Mr. Plummer,
however, finds it <q>very rarely available for the settlement
of minute differences of reading.</q>
</p>

<pb n='xxi'/><anchor id='Pgxxi'/>

<p>
The first modern English translation is Thomas Stapleton's
(1565), published at Antwerp. It is a controversial
work, intended to point out to Queen Elizabeth
<q>in how many and weighty pointes the pretended refourmers
of the Church ... have departed from the
patern of that sounde and Catholike faith planted first
among Englishmen by holy S. Augustin, our Apostle,
and his vertuous company, described truly and sincerely
by Venerable Bede, so called in all Christendom for his
passing vertues and rare lerning, the Author of this
History.</q> To save Elizabeth's time <q>in espying out the
particulars,</q> the translator has <q>gathered out of the
whole History a number of diversities between the pretended
religion of Protestants and the primitive faith of
the english Church.</q> If charm and appropriateness of
style were the only qualities to be aimed at in a translation,
we might well content ourselves with this rendering,
which fills with despair the translator of to-day, debarred
by his date from writing Elizabethan English.
</p>

<p>
The work was again translated by John Stevens (1723),
and a third time (with some omissions) by W. Hurst in
1814. In 1840 Dr. Giles published a new edition of
Stevens's translation with certain alterations; and a
second edition of the same volume was published in 1842,
and incorporated in the collected works of Bede, edited
by Dr. Giles. In 1870 a literal translation by the Rev.
L. Gidley was published. The present volume is a revision
of the translation of Dr. Giles.
</p>

<p>
A brief analysis of the work may be of some use to
the student in keeping distinct the different threads of
the narrative, as owing to the variety of subjects introduced,
and the want of strict chronological order, it is
difficult to grasp the sequence of events as a coherent
whole.
</p>

<p>
The sources from which Bede draws his material are
<pb n='xxii'/><anchor id='Pgxxii'/>
briefly indicated in the dedication to King Ceolwulf
which forms the Preface, and in it he acknowledges his
obligations to the friends and correspondents who have
helped and encouraged him. For the greater part of
Book I (cc. 1-22), which forms the introduction to his
real subject, he depends on earlier authors. Here he
does not specify his sources, but indicates them generally
as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>priorum scripta</foreign>. These authors are mainly Pliny,
Solinus, Orosius, Eutropius, and the British historian
Gildas. In the story of Germanus and Lupus he follows
closely the Life of Germanus by Constantius of Lyons.
Prosper of Aquitaine also supplies him with some materials.
When he comes to his main subject, the History
of the English Church, he appears to rely but little upon
books. Only a very few are referred to here and there,
<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, The Life of St. Fursa, The Life of St. Ethelburg,
Adamnan's work on the Holy Places, and the
Anonymous Life of St. Cuthbert. That some form of
annalistic records existed before his time, and that these
were consulted by him, we may infer from some of his
chronological references (cf. iii, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_I'>1</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_IX'>9</ref>). Local information
with regard to provinces other than Northumbria he
obtains from his correspondents in various parts of England,
and these are expressly mentioned in the Preface.
</p>

<p>
For the history of the Roman mission and of Kent
generally, as well as some particulars with regard to the
conversion of other provinces, his chief source is the
Church of Canterbury, which apparently possessed, besides
oral tradition, written documents relating to the
first beginnings of the Church. Moreover, Nothelm, who
was the bearer of much important material, had been to
Rome and had permission to search the papal archives.
But it is in dealing with the history of Northumbria, as
is natural, that Bede's information is most varied and
copious. Much of it is apparently obtained directly from
<pb n='xxiii'/><anchor id='Pgxxiii'/>
eye-witnesses of the events, much would doubtless be
preserved in the records of the Church of Lindisfarne, to
which he had access, perhaps also in his own monastery.
We know that the monasteries kept calendars in which
the death-days of saints and others were entered, and
other records of similar nature (cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIV'>iv, 14</ref>), and that these
were used as materials for history.
</p>

<p>
Passing to the history itself, we may trace a division
of subjects or periods roughly analogous to the division
into books. Book I contains the long introduction, the
sending of the Roman mission, and the foundation of the
Church; Books II and III, the period of missionary activity
and the establishment of Christianity throughout
the land. Book IV may be said to describe the period of
organization. In Book V the English Church itself becomes
a missionary centre, planting the faith in Germany,
and drawing the Celtic Churches into conformity
with Rome.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Book I.</hi>&mdash;In Book I, cc. 1-22, Bede sketches the early
history of Britain, describing the country and giving
some account of the various races by whom it was inhabited.
The story of the Roman occupation is narrated
at some length, the invasions of the Picts and Scots and
consequent miseries of the Britons, their appeals for help
to the Romans, the final departure of their protectors,
and the coming of the Saxons are described. We have
some shadowy outlines of British Church History in the
legendary account of the conversion of King Lucius, in
the story of St. Alban, affording evidence of a great persecution
of Christians during the Roman occupation, in
the allusions to the Arian and Pelagian heresies, and in
the mission of Germanus and Lupus. A brief allusion to
the mission of Palladius is all that we hear of the Irish
Church at this period.
</p>

<p>
These chapters are introductory to the main subject,
the History of the English Church, which begins in
<pb n='xxiv'/><anchor id='Pgxxiv'/>
Chapter 23 with the mission of St. Augustine in 597 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
The reception of the Christian faith in the kingdom of
Kent and the foundation of a national Church occupy the
remaining chapters of the book. Various letters of Pope
Gregory relating to the mission and his answers to the
questions of Augustine are given at length; and the
Book concludes with a piece of Northumbrian history,
Ethelfrid's conquests of the Britons and the defeat of
Aedan, king of the Dalriadic Scots, at Degsastan in
603 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Book II.</hi>&mdash;Book II opens with a biographical sketch
of Gregory the Great, the founder of the Mission. This
is followed by an account of Augustine's negotiations
with the leaders of the British Church with regard to the
Paschal question and some other matters, his failure to
win them over (a failure apparently largely due to his
own want of tact in dealing with the susceptible Celtic
temperament), his alleged prophecy of disaster and its
fulfilment some time after at the battle of Chester. Then
we have the consecration of Mellitus to London, as
Bishop of the East Saxons, and Justus to Rochester
(604 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>); the evangelization of the East Saxons by
Mellitus; the death of Augustine and succession of
Laurentius as Archbishop (no date is given; it may have
been in 605); fresh attempts at union with the Celtic
Churches, in which again we can perceive a failure of
courtesy on the one side met by an obstinate pride on the
other. The death of Ethelbert in Kent (616 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>) and
that of Sabert in Essex, soon after, lead to a pagan reaction
in both provinces; Mellitus and Justus take refuge
on the Continent; Laurentius, intending to follow them,
is stopped by a vision which leads to the conversion of
King Eadbald and the recovery of Kent for Christianity.
Essex, however, continues to be pagan. On the death of
Laurentius (619 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>), Mellitus succeeds to Canterbury
and is himself succeeded by Justus (in 624). In Chapter 9
we enter upon a new development of the highest importance
in the work of the mission. The marriage of Edwin,
king of Northumbria, and the Kentish princess, Ethelberg,
brings about the conversion of Northumbria
<pb n='xxv'/><anchor id='Pgxxv'/>
through the preaching of Paulinus. The story is told in
detail. Letters from Pope Boniface to Edwin and his
consort are quoted at length, Edwin's early history with
its bearing on the great crisis of his life is related; finally
we have the decisive debate in the Witenagemot at Goodmanham
and the baptism of the king at Easter, 627 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
Through the influence of Edwin on Earpwald, king of
East Anglia, that province is next converted, but on the
death of Earpwald the people lapse into paganism for
three years, till Christianity is finally established by the
labours of Bishop Felix, under the enlightened King Sigbert,
who had himself been drawn to the faith in Gaul.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile, peace and prosperity reign in Northumbria,
and Paulinus extends his preaching to Lindsey. He re-receives
the pall from Pope Honorius, in accordance
with the original intention of Gregory that the Bishop of
York should rank as a metropolitan. At Canterbury,
Justus is succeeded by Archbishop Honorius. Parenthetically
we have extracts from letters, probably of the
year 640 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, addressed by the Roman see to the Irish
clergy on the Paschal question and the Pelagian heresy.
</p>

<p>
In Chapter 20 we have a dramatic climax to the book
in the overthrow and death of Edwin at the battle of
Hatfield in 633 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>; the devastation of Northumbria by
the British king, Caedwalla, and Penda of Mercia; and
the flight of Paulinus, taking with him Ethelberg and
Eanfled to Kent, where he ends his life in charge of the
Church of Rochester. His work in Northumbria seems
for the time, at least, wholly overthrown. Only James
the Deacon remains heroically at his post to keep alive
the smouldering embers of the faith.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Book III.</hi>&mdash;Book III opens with the story of the
apostasy of the Northumbrian kings and the miseries of
the <q>Hateful Year,</q> terminated by the victory of Oswald
at Heavenfield in 634 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> Christianity is brought again
to Northumbria (635 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>) by the Celtic Mission, sent
from Iona at the request of Oswald, who nobly co-operates
with Aidan in the work of evangelization. Aidan
fixes his see at Lindisfarne. The mention of Iona leads
to a short account of the mission of St. Columba to the
<pb n='xxvi'/><anchor id='Pgxxvi'/>
Northern Picts in 565 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, and incidentally of St.
Ninian's mission to the Southern Picts <q>long before</q>;
the grant of Iona to St. Columba, and its constitution,
the character of its monks and their error with regard to
Easter. The characters of Aidan and Oswald are described;
and the union of Deira and Bernicia under
Oswald is briefly mentioned.
</p>

<p>
In Chapter 7 we pass to a fresh missionary enterprise.
Birinus, sent to Britain by Pope Honorius, converts the
West Saxons. Their king, Cynegils, is baptized, and a
see is established at Dorchester, in Oxfordshire. Under
Coinwalch, the successor of Cynegils, the province passes
through various vicissitudes, political and ecclesiastical,
and finally the West Saxon see is fixed at Winchester.
</p>

<p>
In Kent, Earconbert succeeds Eadbald in 640 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, and
takes vigorous measures for the suppression of idolatry.
His daughter, Earcongota, and many other high-born
English ladies enter the religious life in Gaul, for convents
are still scarce in England.
</p>

<p>
In Chapter 9, reverting to the history of Northumbria,
Bede tells us of the death of Oswald at Maserfelth in
642, and relates at length various miracles wrought by
his relics. Oswald is succeeded by Oswy in Bernicia and
in Deira by Oswin. The latter is treacherously murdered
by Oswy; his character is described. The death of
Aidan (in 651) immediately follows that of his beloved
king; Aidan's miracles are related, and a warm tribute
is paid to his character, in spite of the inevitable error
with regard to Easter, which is severely condemned.
</p>

<p>
In Chapter 18, passing again to East Anglian history,
we hear of King Sigbert's services to education, and of
his retirement to a monastery from which he was forcibly
drawn to fall in battle against the Mercians. (The
chronology is here very vague.) A vision of the Irish St.
Fursa, who founded the monastery of Cnobheresburg in
East Anglia is told in detail. Changes in the episcopate
in East Anglia and elsewhere are mentioned. Deusdedit
succeeds Honorius as Archbishop of Canterbury in 654.
</p>

<p>
Again, a Northumbrian prince gives a fresh impulse
to the spread of Christianity. In 653 the Middle Angles
<pb n='xxvii'/><anchor id='Pgxxvii'/>
(who occupied a part of Mercia) are converted, their
prince, Peada, being persuaded chiefly by his brother-in-law,
Alchfrid, a son of Oswy. Four priests are sent to
them to preach and baptize, Cedd, Adda, Betti, and
Diuma, and Diuma becomes bishop of the Middle Angles
and Mercians. Similarly, at this time, King Sigbert of
Essex listens to the exhortations of his friend, King
Oswy, and, at the preaching of Cedd, the East Saxons
receive the faith a second time. Cedd becomes their
bishop. Sigbert's tragic death is related. His successor,
Suidhelm, receives baptism at the hands of Cedd. The
foundation of Lastingham by Ethelwald of Deira and its
consecration by Cedd are described. Cedd dies of the
plague of 664.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile, important political changes have taken
place in the north: the defeat and death of Penda at the
Winwaed in 655 are followed by Oswy's rule, which
established Christianity in Mercia, in spite of a successful
rebellion after three years, when the Mercians threw off
the yoke of Northumbria and set up Penda's son, Wulfhere,
as their king.
</p>

<p>
In Chapter 25 we come to the Synod of Whitby (664
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>), which settled the Easter question for the English
Church. Wilfrid comes to the front as a champion of
the Catholic rules. The opposing party either retire or
conform. The self-denial and devotion of the Celtic
missionaries are highly praised, and some account of the
life led by English students in Ireland follows, with the
story of the self-dedication of Egbert, who is destined to
play a prominent part afterwards in the history of the
Church.
</p>

<p>
The consecration of both Wilfrid and Ceadda (664 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>),
as bishops of Northumbria leads to complications in the
episcopate. An important step towards the unity of the
English nation in ecclesiastical matters is taken when
Wighard is sent to Rome by the kings Oswy and Egbert,
acting in concert, to be consecrated as Archbishop of
Canterbury (667 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>). Wighard dies there, and Pope
Vitalian undertakes to find an archbishop for the English
Church.
</p>

<pb n='xxviii'/><anchor id='Pgxxviii'/>

<p>
The book ends with a fresh apostasy in Essex during
the miseries of the great plague of 664. Mercia, so lately
itself evangelized, becomes a new missionary centre,
King Wulfhere sending Bishop Jaruman to recall the
East Saxons to the faith.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Book IV.</hi>&mdash;In all but one of the kingdoms of England
Christianity is now, at least in name, established, and the
Church settles down to the work of organization. The
man for this task is found in Theodore of Tarsus, consecrated
Archbishop of the English in 668. He arrives
at Canterbury in 669. We hear at once of the vigorous
impulse given by him and Abbot Hadrian to the various
departments of education there. Finding an irregularity
in Ceadda's orders, he completes his ordination and
makes him Bishop of the Mercians (probably in 669),
with his see at Lichfield. Ceadda's death (672 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>), his
character, and the miracles and visions connected with
him are described. Parenthetically we get an account of
Colman's activity in Ireland after his retirement, in consequence
of the decision at Whitby. The most important
political events at this time are the death of Oswy and
succession of Egfrid in Northumbria in 670 or 671, and
the death of Egbert and succession of Hlothere in Kent
in 673.
</p>

<p>
In the same year the Council of Hertford, the first
English provincial council, is held, and marks the strength
and independence of the Church. Theodore proceeds with
his reforms in the episcopate. Various events of ecclesiastical
importance follow; the East Anglian diocese is
divided about this time, and other changes are effected.
</p>

<p>
Essex, so long prone to lapses into paganism, becomes
at this time a centre of religious life under its Bishop
Earconwald and its king Sebbi. Earconwald, whose
holiness is attested by many miraculous circumstances,
was the founder of the monasteries of Chertsey and
Barking, the latter of which was ruled by his sister, the
saintly Ethelburg. Various miracles are related in connection
with her and her monastery. The king of the
East Saxons, Sebbi, is a man of unusual piety who resigns
his kingdom and receives the tonsure.
</p>

<pb n='xxix'/><anchor id='Pgxxix'/>

<p>
After a brief allusion to West Saxon history, the devastation
of Kent by Ethelred of Mercia in 676, and
certain changes in the episcopate, we come to an important
step in the organization of the Church taken by
Theodore. In pursuance of his policy of increasing the
number of bishops, he subdivides the great Northumbrian
diocese. Wilfrid is expelled (678 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>). From these
events we pass summarily to the evangelization of the
South Saxons by Wilfrid, who extends his labours to the
Isle of Wight, and thus the last of the English provinces
is won for the faith.
</p>

<p>
In the Council of Hatfield (680 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>) the English
Church asserts its orthodoxy and unites with the continental
Churches in repudiating the heresy of the Monothelites.
Turning to Northumbrian history, we have
the story of Egfrid's queen, Ethelthryth, and a hymn
composed in her honour by Bede. The war between
Mercia and Northumbria in 679 is ended by the mediation
of Theodore, and a miracle in connection with the
battle of the Trent is related.
</p>

<p>
The remainder of the book is occupied mainly with
Northumbrian history, the life and death of Hilda, Abbess
of Whitby, the story of the poet Caedmon, the destruction
of Coldingham, prophesied by the monk Adamnan,
Egfrid's invasion of Ireland (684 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>) and of the country
of the Picts (685 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>), his defeat and death in that year,
the decline of Northumbria, the flight of Bishop Trumwine
from Abercorn, and the succession of Aldfrid to the
kingdom. The death of Hlothere of Kent (685 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>) is
followed by anarchy in that province, till Wictred succeeds
and restores peace.
</p>

<p>
In Chapters 27-32 we have an account of the life of
St. Cuthbert and stories of the miracles wrought by his
relics.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Book V.</hi>&mdash;Book V opens with the story of the holy
Ethelwald, who succeeded Cuthbert as anchorite at
Farne, and a miracle wrought through his intercession.
This is followed (cc. 2-6) by an account of John of
Beverley, Bishop of Hexham, and the miracles attributed
to him. In Chapter 7 we have a piece of West Saxon
<pb n='xxx'/><anchor id='Pgxxx'/>
history: Caedwalla, King of Wessex, after a life of war
and bloodshed, goes to Rome to receive baptism there,
and dies immediately after his admission into the Church
(689 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>). He is succeeded by Ini, who in 725 likewise
ended his days at Rome.
</p>

<p>
In 690 Theodore dies, after an episcopate of twenty-two
years. Bertwald succeeds him at Canterbury in 693.
</p>

<p>
At this time Englishmen begin to extend their missionary
enterprise abroad. Various missions are undertaken
by men who have lived long in Ireland and caught the
Celtic zeal for the work of evangelization. The story is
told of the attempted mission of Egbert to Germany and
the unsuccessful venture of Witbert. Wilbrord (in 690)
and others plant the faith among the German tribes.
</p>

<p>
The vision of Drythelm is inserted here, probably on
chronological grounds (<q>his temporibus</q>), and other
visions of the future world follow.
</p>

<p>
Apparently about the same time a change is effected
in the attitude of the greater part of the Celtic Church
towards the Paschal question. The Northern Irish are
converted to the Roman usages by Adamnan, Abbot of
Iona, whose book on the <q>Holy Places</q> is here described
(cc. 16-17).
</p>

<p>
The death of Aldfrid and succession of Osred in
Northumbria in 705 are the next events narrated.
</p>

<p>
About this time the division of the West Saxon diocese
is carried out, Aldhelm being appointed to Sherborne
and Daniel to Winchester; the South Saxons receive a
bishop of their own for the first time. In 709 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> Coenred
of Mercia and Offa of Essex receive the tonsure at
Rome, and in the same year Bishop Wilfrid dies. The
story of his life is told.
</p>

<p>
Not long after, Hadrian dies and is succeeded by
Albinus as Abbot of St. Augustine's. Bede's friend,
Acca, succeeds Wilfrid as Bishop of Hexham. His services
to the Church are enumerated.
</p>

<p>
An important step is taken at this time by the Northern
Picts in the acceptance of the Roman rules with regard
to Easter and the tonsure. The letter of Abbot Ceolfrid
of Wearmouth and Jarrow to the Pictish king Naiton
<pb n='xxxi'/><anchor id='Pgxxxi'/>
on this subject is quoted at length. Soon after, Iona
yields to the preaching of Egbert, and receives the Catholic
usages. Egbert dies in 729. In Chapter 23 a
number of events are briefly mentioned; the death of
Wictred of Kent in 725, and the succession of his sons,
the death of the learned Tobias, Bishop of Rochester, in
726, the appearance of two comets in 729, followed by
the devastation of Gaul by the Saracens, the death of
the Northumbrian king Osric, and succession of Ceolwulf
in 729; finally, the death of Archbishop Bertwald in 731
and the succession of Tatwine. Then follows an account
of the state of the English episcopate in 731, the year
in which Bede finished the History. The relations of the
English with Picts, Scots, and Britons are described, and
some allusion is made to the growth of monasticism in
this time of external peace.
</p>

<p>
The book closes in Chapter 24 with a chronological
summary of the whole work, an autobiographical sketch
of the author, and a list of his works.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='xxxiii'/><anchor id='Pgxxxiii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Life Of Bede</head>

<p>
Few lives afford less material for the biographer
than Bede's; few seem to possess a more irresistible
fascination. Often as the simple story has been told, the
desire to tell it afresh appears to be perennial. And yet
it is perhaps as wholly devoid of incident as any life
could be. The short autobiographical sketch at the end
of the <q>Ecclesiastical History</q> tells us practically all:
that he was born in the territory of the twin monastery
of Wearmouth and Jarrow; that at the age of seven he
was sent by his kinsfolk to be brought up, first under
the Abbot Benedict, afterwards under Ceolfrid; that in
his nineteenth year (the canonical age was twenty-five)
he was admitted to the diaconate, and received priest's
orders in his thirtieth year, in both instances at the hands
of John, Bishop of Hexham, and by order of the Abbot
Ceolfrid; that he spent his whole life in the monastery in
learning, in teaching, and in writing, and in the observance
of the monastic rule and attendance at the daily
services of the Church. Of his family we know nothing;
the name Beda appears to have been not uncommon.
The fact that he was handed over by kinsmen (<q>cura
propinquorum</q>) to Abbot Benedict would seem to imply
that he was an orphan when he entered the monastery
at the age of seven, but it was not unusual for parents
to dedicate their infant children to the religious life, in
many cases even at an earlier age than Bede's. We may
compare the story of the little boy, Aesica, at Barking,
related by Bede, and of Elfled, the daughter of Oswy,
dedicated by her father before she was a year old.
</p>

<pb n='xxxiv'/><anchor id='Pgxxxiv'/>

<p>
The epithet <q>Venerable,</q> commonly attached to his
name, has given rise to more than one legend. It was
apparently first applied to him in the ninth century, and
is said to have been an appellation of priests. The best
known of these legends is Fuller's story of a certain
<q>dunce monk</q> who set about writing Bede's epitaph,
and being unable to complete the verse, <q>Hic sunt in
fossa Bedae ... ossa,</q> went to bed with his task unfinished.
Returning to it in the morning, he found that
an angel had filled the gap with the word <q>venerabilis.</q>
Another account tells how Bede, in his old age, when his
eyes were dim, was induced by certain <q>mockers</q> to
preach, under the mistaken belief that the people were
assembled to hear him. As he ended his sermon with a
solemn invocation of the Trinity, the angels (in one
version it is the stones of a rocky valley) responded
<q>Amen, very venerable Bede.</q>
</p>

<p>
The land on which Bede was born was granted by
Egfrid to Benedict Biscop for the foundation of the
monasteries a short time after the birth of Bede. Wearmouth
was founded in 674, Jarrow in 681 or 682. Bede
was among those members of the community who were
transferred to Jarrow under Abbot Ceolfrid, and under
his rule and that of his successor, Huaetbert, he passed
his life. With regard to the chief dates, the authorities
differ, Simeon of Durham and others placing his birth as
late as 677. Bede himself tells us that he was in his
fifty-ninth year when he wrote the short autobiography
at the end of the History. That work was finished in
731, and there seems to be no good reason to suppose
that the autobiographical sketch was written at a later
time. We may infer then that he was born in 673, that
he was ordained deacon in 691 and priest in 702. For
his death, 735, the date given in the <ref target='Continuation'><q>Continuation,</q></ref>
seems to be supported by the evidence of the letter of
Cuthbert to Cuthwin (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi>). From this it appears
that he died on a Wednesday, which nevertheless is
called Ascension Day, implying, doubtless, that his death
occurred on the eve, after the festival had begun, according
to ecclesiastical reckoning. It is further explained
<pb n='xxxv'/><anchor id='Pgxxxv'/>
that Ascension Day was on the 26th of May (<q>VII
Kal. Junii</q>),<note place='foot'>The St. Gallen MS. (ninth century) has, however, <q>VII Id.
Mai.</q> Messrs. Mayor and Lumby, adopting this reading, place
his death as late as 742, in which year the eve of Ascension Day
fell on May 9th. For their argument, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Mayor and Lumby, pp.
401, 402.</note> which was actually the case in the year
735.
</p>

<p>
Beyond the testimony borne to his exceptional diligence
as a student in a letter from Alcuin to the monks of
Wearmouth and Jarrow, we hear nothing of his childhood
and early youth. One anecdote in the Anonymous
History of the Abbots may perhaps refer to him, though
no name is given. It tells how, when the plague of 686
devastated the monastery, the Abbot Ceolfrid, for lack
of fit persons to assist at the daily offices, decided to
recite the psalms without antiphons, except at vespers
and matins. But after a week's trial, unable to bear it
any longer, he restored the antiphons to their proper
place, and with the help of one little boy carried on the
services in the usual manner. This little boy is described
as being, at the time the History was written, a priest of
that monastery who <q>duly, both by his words and
writings, commends the Abbot's praiseworthy deeds to
all who seek to know them,</q> and he has generally been
supposed to be Bede.
</p>

<p>
In the <q>Ecclesiastical History</q> (IV, 3) there is an
allusion to Bede's teachers, one of whom, Trumbert,
educated at Lastingham under Ceadda, is mentioned by
name. The monastery of Wearmouth and Jarrow must
have offered exceptional facilities for study. Benedict
had enriched it with many treasures which he brought
with him from his travels. Chief among these was the
famous library which he founded and which was enlarged
by Abbot Ceolfrid. Here Bede acquired that wide and
varied learning revealed in his historical, scientific, and
theological works. He studied with particular care and
reverence the patristic writings; his theological treatises
were, as he says, <q>compiled out of the works of the
venerable Fathers.</q> He must have had a considerable
<pb n='xxxvi'/><anchor id='Pgxxxvi'/>
knowledge of Greek, probably he knew some Hebrew.
Though he is not wholly free from the mediaeval churchman's
distrust of pagan authors, he constantly betrays
his acquaintance with them, and the sense of form which
must unconsciously influence the student of classical
literature has passed into his own writings and preserved
him from the barbarism of monkish Latin. His style is
singularly clear, simple, and fluent, as free from obscurity
as from affectation and bombast.
</p>

<p>
Thus was the foundation laid of that sound learning
upon which his widespread influence both as a teacher
and writer was reared. <q>I always took delight,</q> he
tells us, <q>in learning, or teaching, or writing.</q> Probably
his writing was, as is so often the case, the outcome
of his teaching; his object in both is to meet <q>the
needs of the brethren.</q> One of his pupils was Archbishop
Egbert, the founder of the school of York, which gave
a fresh impulse to learning, not only in England, but
through Alcuin in France, at a time when a revival was
most to be desired.
</p>

<p>
It was to Egbert that he paid one of the only two
visits which he records. In the <q>Epistola ad Ecgbertum</q>
he alludes to a short stay he had made with him the year
before, and declines, on account of the illness which
proved to be his last, an invitation to visit him again.
He visited Lindisfarne in connection with his task of
writing the life of Cuthbert. Otherwise we have no
authentic record of any absence from the monastery.
The story that he went to Rome at the request of Pope
Sergius, founded on a statement of William of Malmesbury,
is now regarded as highly improbable. The oldest
MS. of the letter of Sergius, requesting Ceolfrid to send
one of his monks to Rome, has no mention of the name
of Bede. If such an event had ever disturbed his accustomed
course of life, it is inconceivable that he should
nowhere allude to it. Still less is the assertion that he
lived and taught at Cambridge one which need be
seriously debated by the present generation.
</p>

<p>
We may fairly assume that, except for a few short
absences such as the visits to York and Lindisfarne, his
<pb n='xxxvii'/><anchor id='Pgxxxvii'/>
whole life was spent in the monastery. It must have
been a life of unremitting toil. His writings, numerous
as they are, covering a wide range of subjects and involving
the severest study, can only have been a part of
his work; he had, besides, his duties as priest, teacher,
and member of a religious community to fulfil. Even the
manual labour of his literary work must have been considerable.
He did not employ an amanuensis, and he
had not the advantages with regard to copyists which a
member of one of the larger monasteries might have
had. <q>Ipse mihi dictator simul notarius (= shorthand
writer) et librarius (= copyist),</q> he writes. Yet he never
flags. Through all the outward monotony of his days
his own interest remains fresh. He <q>takes delight</q>
(<q>dulce habui</q>) in it all. It is a life full of eager activity
in intellectual things, of a keen and patriotic interest in
the wider life beyond the monastery walls, which shows
itself sadly enough in his reflections on the evils of the
times, of the ardent charity which spends itself in labour
for the brethren, and, pervading the whole, that spirit of
quiet obedience and devotion which his own simple
words describe as <q>the observance of monastic rule and
the daily charge of singing in the Church.</q> We can
picture him, at the appointed hours, breaking off his
absorbing occupations to take his place at the daily
offices, lest, as he believed, he should fail to meet the
angels there. Alcuin records a saying of his, <q>I know
that angels visit the canonical hours and the congregations
of the brethren. What if they do not find me
among the brethren? May they not say, <q>Where is
Bede?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
It is probably here, in this harmony of work and devotion,
that we may find the secret of the fascination in the
record of his uneventful days. It reconciles the sharp
antithesis between the active and the contemplative life.
It seems to attain to that ideal of <q>toil unsever'd from
tranquillity</q> which haunts us all, but which we have
almost ceased to associate with the life of man under
present conditions. Balance, moderation, or rather, that
rare quality which has been well called <q>the sanity of
<pb n='xxxviii'/><anchor id='Pgxxxviii'/>
saintliness,</q><note place='foot'>The phrase is the present Bishop of Oxford's in <q>Studies in
the Christian Character.</q></note> these give a unity to the life of Bede and
preserve him from the exaggerations of the conventual
ideal. With all his admiration for the ascetic life, he
recognizes human limitations. It is cheering to find that
even he felt the need of a holiday. <q>Having completed,</q>
he writes, <q>the third book of the Commentary on
Samuel, I thought I would rest awhile, and, after recovering
in that way my delight in study and writing,
proceed to take in hand the fourth.</q> Intellectual power
commands his homage, but his mind is open to the appreciation
of all forms of excellence. It is the unlearned
brother, unfit for study and occupied in manual labour,
to whom, in his story, it is vouchsafed to hear the singing
of the angels who came to summon Ceadda to his rest.
The life of devotion ranks highest in his estimation, but
he records with approval how St. Cuthbert thought <q>that
to afford the weak brethren the help of his exhortation
stood in the stead of prayer, knowing that He Who said
<q>Thou shalt love the Lord thy God,</q> said likewise,
<q>Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.</q></q> He tells
us how St. Gregory bewailed his own loss in being
forced by his office to be entangled in worldly affairs.
<q>But,</q> adds the human-hearted biographer, <q>it behoves
us to believe that he lost nothing of his monastic
perfection by reason of his pastoral charge, but rather
that he gained greater profit through the labour of converting
many, than by the former calm of his private
life.</q> Yet he holds that this immunity from the evil influence
of the world was chiefly due to Gregory's care in
organizing his house like a monastery and safeguarding
the opportunities for prayer and devotional study, even
while he was immersed in affairs at the court of Constantinople,
and afterwards, when he held the most
onerous office in the Church.
</p>

<p>
This quality of sanity shows itself again in an unusual
degree of fairness to opponents. The Paschal error,
indeed, moves his indignation in a manner which is incomprehensible
<pb n='xxxix'/><anchor id='Pgxxxix'/>
and distasteful to the modern reader, but
even in the perverse and erring Celts he can recognize
<q>a zeal of God, though not according to knowledge.</q>
Aidan's holiness of life wins from him a warm tribute of
admiration. In the monks of Iona, the stronghold of
the Celtic system, he can perceive the fruit of good
works and find an excuse for their error in their isolated
situation. In the British Church it is the lack of missionary
zeal, rather than their attitude towards the Easter
question, which calls forth his strongest condemnation.
</p>

<p>
A characteristic akin to this is his love of truth. As a
historian, it shows itself in his scrupulous care in investigating
evidence and in acknowledging the sources
from which he draws. Nowhere is his intellectual honesty
more apparent than in dealing with what he believes to
be the miraculous element in his history. In whatever
way we may regard these anecdotes, there can be no
doubt that Bede took the utmost pains to assure himself
of their authenticity. He is careful to acquire, if possible,
first-hand evidence; where this cannot be obtained,
he scrupulously mentions the lack of it. He admits only
the testimony of witnesses of high character and generally
quotes them by name.
</p>

<p>
These are but a few of the glimpses afforded us of the
personality of Bede, a personality never obtruded, but
everywhere unconsciously revealed in his work. Everywhere
we find the impress of a mind of wide intellectual
grasp, a character of the highest saintliness, and a gentle
refinement of thought and feeling. The lofty spirituality
of Bede, his great learning and scholarly attainment are
the more striking when we reflect how recently his nation
had emerged from barbarism and received Christianity
and the culture which it brought with it to these shores.
</p>

<p>
The letter in which he declines Egbert's invitation on
the plea of illness is dated November, 734. If we may
assume that his death took place on the eve of Ascension
Day in 735, no long period of enfeebled health clouded
the close of his life, and weakness never interrupted his
work. His death has been described by his pupil, Cuthbert,
who afterwards became Abbot of Wearmouth and
<pb n='xl'/><anchor id='Pgxl'/>
Jarrow in succession to Huaetbert, in the letter quoted
below. He was first buried at Jarrow but, according to
Simeon of Durham, his relics were stolen by the priest,
Elfred, and carried to Durham. In 1104, when the bones
of Cuthbert were translated to the new Cathedral, those
of Bede were found with them. Not long after, Hugh de
Puisac erected a shrine of gold and silver, adorned with
jewels, in which he placed them, along with the relics of
many other saints. The shrine disappeared at the Reformation,
and only the stone on which it rested remains.<note place='foot'>Stevenson, <q>Church Historians,</q> vol. i.</note>
</p>

<div>
<head>Letter of Cuthbert to Cuthwin.</head>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>To his fellow-lector, Cuthwin, beloved in Christ,
Cuthbert, his fellow-student, greeting and salvation for
ever in the Lord. I have very gladly received the gift
which thou sentest to me, and with much joy have read
thy devout and learned letter, wherein I found that which
I greatly desired, to wit, that masses and holy prayers
are diligently offered by you for our father and master
Bede, beloved of God. Wherefore I rejoice, rather for
love of him than from confidence in my own power, to
relate in few words after what manner he departed out
of this world, understanding also that thou hast desired
and asked this of me. He was troubled with weakness
and chiefly with difficulty in breathing, yet almost without
pain, for about a fortnight before the day of our
Lord's Resurrection; and thus he afterwards passed his
time, cheerful and rejoicing, giving thanks to Almighty
God every day and night, nay, every hour, till the day of
our Lord's Ascension, to wit, the twenty-sixth day of May,
and daily gave lessons to us, his disciples; and whatsoever
remained of the day he spent in singing psalms, as
far as he was able; he also strove to pass all the night
joyfully in prayer and thanksgiving to God, save only
when a short sleep prevented it; and then he no sooner
awoke than he straightway began again to repeat the
well-known sacred songs, and ceased not to give thanks
<pb n='xli'/><anchor id='Pgxli'/>
to God with uplifted hands. I declare with truth that
I have never seen with my eyes, or heard with my ears,
any man so earnest in giving thanks to the living God.
O truly blessed man! He repeated the words of St. Paul
the Apostle, <q>It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God,</q> and much more out of Holy Scripture;
wherein also he admonished us to think of our last hour,
and to arise out of the sleep of the soul; and being
learned in our native poetry, he said also in our tongue,
concerning the dread parting of souls from the body:</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Fore then neidfaerae</l>
<l>naenig uiuurthit</l>
<l>thonc suotturra</l>
<l>than him tharf sie</l>
<l>to ymb hycggannae</l>
<l>aer his hin iongae</l>
<l>huaet his gastae</l>
<l>godaes aeththa yflaes</l>
<l>aefter deothdaege</l>
<l>doemid uueorthae.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Which being interpreted is: <q>Before the inevitable
journey hence, no man is wiser than is needful that he
may consider, ere the soul departs, what good or evil it
hath done and how it shall be judged after its departure.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>He also sang antiphons for our comfort and his own.
One of these is, <q>O King of Glory, Lord of all power,
Who, triumphing this day, didst ascend above all the
heavens, leave us not comfortless, but send to us the
promise of the Father, even the Spirit of Truth&mdash;Hallelujah.</q>
And when he came to the words, <q>leave us not
comfortless,</q> he burst into tears and wept much. And
an hour after, he fell to repeating what he had begun.
And this he did the whole day, and we, hearing it,
mourned with him and wept. Now we read and now we
lamented, nay, we wept even as we read. In such rapture
we passed the fifty days' festival<note place='foot'>From Easter to Whitsuntide.</note> till the aforesaid day;
and he rejoiced greatly and gave God thanks, because he
had been accounted worthy to suffer such weakness.
And he often said, <q>God scourgeth every son whom He
<pb n='xlii'/><anchor id='Pgxlii'/>
receiveth</q>; and the words of St. Ambrose, <q>I have not
so lived as to be ashamed to live among you; but neither
do I fear to die, because we have a merciful Lord.</q> And
during those days, besides the lessons we had daily from
him, and the singing of the Psalms, there were two
memorable works, which he strove to finish; to wit, his
translation of the Gospel of St. John, from the beginning,
as far as the words, <q>But what are they among so
many?</q> into our own tongue, for the benefit of the
Church of God; and some selections from the books of
Bishop Isidore, saying, <q>I would not have my boys read
a lie, nor labour herein without profit after my death.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When the Tuesday before the Ascension of our Lord
came, he began to suffer still more in his breathing, and
there was some swelling in his feet. But he went on
teaching all that day and dictating cheerfully, and now
and then said among other things, <q>Learn quickly, I
know not how long I shall endure, and whether my
Maker will not soon take me away.</q> But to us it seemed
that haply he knew well the time of his departure; and
so he spent the night, awake, in giving of thanks. And
when the morning dawned, that is, on the Wednesday,
he bade us write with all speed what we had begun.
And this we did until the third hour. And from the third
hour we walked in procession with the relics of the
saints, according to the custom of that day.<note place='foot'>Rogation Wednesday.</note> And there
was one of us with him who said to him, <q>There is still
one chapter wanting of the book which thou hast been
dictating, but I deem it burdensome for thee to be questioned
any further.</q> He answered, <q>Nay, it is light,
take thy pen and make ready, and write quickly.</q> And
this was done. But at the ninth hour he said to me,
<q>I have certain treasures in my coffer, some spices,
napkins and incense; run quickly and bring the priests
of our monastery to me, that I may distribute among
them the gifts which God has bestowed on me.</q> And
this I did trembling, and when they were come, he spoke
to every one of them, admonishing and entreating them
<pb n='xliii'/><anchor id='Pgxliii'/>
that they should diligently offer masses and prayers for
him, and they promised readily. But they all mourned
and wept, sorrowing most of all for the words which he
spake, because they thought that they should see his
face no long time in this world. But they rejoiced for
that he said, <q>It is time for me, if it be my Maker's will,
to be set free from the flesh, and come to Him Who,
when as yet I was not, formed me out of nothing. I
have lived long; and well has my pitiful judge disposed
my life for me; the time of my release is at hand; for
my soul longs to see Christ my King in His beauty.</q>
Having said this and much more for our profit and edification,
he passed his last day in gladness till the evening;
and the aforesaid boy, whose name was Wilbert,
still said, <q>Dear master, there is yet one sentence not
written.</q> He answered, <q>It is well, write it.</q> Soon
after, the boy said, <q>Now it is written.</q> And he said,
<q>It is well, thou hast said truly, it is finished. Take my
head in thy hands, for I rejoice greatly to sit facing my
holy place where I was wont to pray, that I too, sitting
there, may call upon my Father.</q> And thus on the
pavement of his little cell, chanting <q>Glory be to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost,</q> and the
rest, he breathed his last.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And without doubt we must believe that inasmuch as
he had always been devout and earnest on earth in the
praise of God, his soul was carried by angels to the joys
of Heaven which he desired. And all who heard him or
beheld the death of our father Bede, said that they had
never seen any other end his life in so great devotion and
peace. For, as thou hast heard, so long as the soul
abode in the body, he chanted the <q>Gloria Patri</q> and
other words to the glory of God, and with outstretched
hands ceased not to give thanks to God.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But know this, that much could be told and written
concerning him, but my want of learning cuts short my
words. Nevertheless, with the help of God, I purpose at
leisure to write more fully concerning him, of those things
which I saw with my own eyes and heard with my own
ears.</q>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='xlv'/><anchor id='Pgxlv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Errata</head>

<p>
Page <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, headline, <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> <q>54 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> <q>54 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Page <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, headline, <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> <q>394 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></q> <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> <q>395 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></q>
</p>

<p>
Page <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>, note 4, <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> <q>cc.</q> <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> <q>pp.</q> [Transcriber's Note: This is the footnote to Bright.]
</p>

<p>
Page <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, note 1, <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> <q>St. James <q>the Less</q></q> <hi rend='italic'>read</hi>
<q>James, <q>the Lord's brother.</q></q>
[Transcriber's Note: This is the footnote to <q>the Eastern.</q>]
</p>

<p>
Page <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, note 2, <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> <q>Lumley</q> <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> <q>Lumby.</q>
[Transcriber's Note: This is the footnote starting <q>A stone.</q>]
</p>

<p>
Page <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, note 1, line 4, <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> <q>existence</q> <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> <q>co-existence.</q>
[Transcriber's Note: This is the footnote starting <q>Eutyches was Archimandrite.</q>]
</p>

<p>
Page <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>, line 7, <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> <q>Gedmund</q> <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> <q>Gebmund.</q>
</p>

<p>
Page <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, note 6, <hi rend='italic'>for</hi> <q>p. 56</q> <hi rend='italic'>read</hi> <q>p. 356.</q>
[Transcriber's Note: This is the footnote starting <q>Ripon, <hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi></q>]
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Preface'/>
<head>Preface</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>To the most glorious king Ceolwulf.<note place='foot'>King of Northumbria, cf. V, 23. He succeeded Osric, 729 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
In a revolt he was forcibly tonsured, 731, but restored. He voluntarily
became a monk in Lindisfarne in 737. The fact that Bede
submitted the Ecclesiastical History to him for revision bears
witness to his piety and learning.</note> Bede, the servant of
Christ and Priest.</hi>
</p>

<p>
I formerly, at your request, most readily sent to you the
Ecclesiastical History of the English Nation, which I had
lately published, for you to read and judge; and I now
send it again to be transcribed, and more fully studied at
your leisure. And I rejoice greatly at the sincerity and
zeal, with which you not only diligently give ear to hear
the words of Holy Scripture, but also industriously take
care to become acquainted with the actions and sayings
of former men of renown, especially of our own
nation. For if history relates good things of good men,
the attentive hearer is excited to imitate that which is
good; or if it recounts evil things of wicked persons,
none the less the conscientious and devout hearer or
reader, shunning that which is hurtful and wrong, is the
more earnestly fired to perform those things which he
knows to be good, and worthy of the service of God.
And as you have carefully marked this, you are desirous
that the said history should be more fully made known to
yourself, and to those over whom the Divine Authority
has appointed you governor, from your great regard to
the common good. But to the end that I may remove
all occasion of doubting what I have written, both from
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
yourself and other readers or hearers of this history, I
will take care briefly to show you from what authors I
chiefly learned the same.
</p>

<p>
My principal authority and aid in this work was the
most learned and reverend Abbot Albinus;<note place='foot'>Albinus, the first English abbot of the monastery of SS. Peter
and Paul at Canterbury, succeeded Hadrian in 709 or 710. On his
scholarship, cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XX'>V, 20</ref>.</note> who, educated
in the Church of Canterbury by those venerable
and learned men, Archbishop Theodore<note place='foot'>Theodore, the great archbishop, noted for his organization of
the English Church and his services to education, consecrated in
668, at the age of sixty-five, by Pope Vitalian, on the recommendation
of Hadrian, who had himself twice declined the office of archbishop.
Theodore was a native of Tarsus, in Cilicia, a man of
great learning and scholarly attainments. Cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_I'>IV, 1</ref>.</note> of blessed
memory, and the Abbot Hadrian,<note place='foot'>Hadrian (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> previous note, cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_I'>IV, 1</ref>), an African by birth, sent
to England by Pope Vitalian along with Theodore, became Abbot
of SS. Peter and Paul, Canterbury. He co-operated with Theodore
in his educational work.</note> transmitted to me by
Nothelm,<note place='foot'>A presbyter of London, afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury,
735. Received the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pallium</foreign> (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> I, 27, p. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, note) in 736.</note> the pious priest of the Church of London,
either in writing, or by word of mouth of the same
Nothelm, all that he thought worthy of memory that
had been done in the province of Kent, or the adjacent
parts, by the disciples of the blessed Pope Gregory,<note place='foot'>Gregory I (the Great), who sent the Roman mission to England.</note> as
he had learned the same either from written records, or
the traditions of his predecessors. The same Nothelm,
afterwards went to Rome, and having, with leave of
the present Pope Gregory,<note place='foot'>Gregory II, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Plummer <hi rend='italic'>ad loc.</hi> for arguments showing conclusively
that Gregory III cannot be meant.</note> searched into the archives of
the Holy Roman Church, found there some epistles of
the blessed Pope Gregory, and other popes; and, returning
home, by the advice of the aforesaid most reverend
father Albinus, brought them to me, to be inserted in my
history. Thus, from the beginning of this volume to the
time when the English nation received the faith of Christ,
we have acquired matter from the writings of former men,
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
gathered from various sources; but from that time till the
present, what was transacted in the Church of Canterbury
by the disciples of the blessed Pope Gregory or their successors,
and under what kings the same happened, has
been conveyed to us, as we have said, by Nothelm through
the industry of the aforesaid Abbot Albinus. They also
partly informed me by what bishops and under what
kings the provinces of the East and West Saxons, as
also of the East Angles, and of the Northumbrians, received
the grace of the Gospel. In short, I was chiefly
encouraged to undertake this work by the exhortations
of the same Albinus. In like manner, Daniel,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVI'>IV, 16</ref>, and <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>V, 18</ref>. In <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIII'>V, 23</ref> he is more accurately described
as <q>Ventanus antistes.</q> He was consecrated Bishop of Winchester
when the West Saxon bishopric was divided in 705; and
his diocese comprised only the smaller part of Wessex. He was
the friend and counsellor of St. Boniface.</note> the most
reverend Bishop of the West Saxons, who is still living,
communicated to me in writing some things relating to
the Ecclesiastical History of that province, and the adjoining
one of the South Saxons, as also of the Isle of
Wight. But how, by the ministry of those holy priests
of Christ, Cedd<note place='foot'>Bishop of the East Saxons, cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXI'>III, 21</ref> foll.</note> and Ceadda,<note place='foot'>St. Chad, Bishop of the Northumbrians, afterwards of Lichfield;
brother of Cedd: <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> III, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVIII'>28</ref>; IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_II'>2</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_III'>3</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>V, 19</ref>.</note> the province of the Mercians
was brought to the faith of Christ, which they knew
not before, and how that of the East Saxons recovered
the faith after having rejected it, and how those fathers
lived and died, we learned from the brethren of the
monastery, which was built by them, and is called Laestingaeu.<note place='foot'>Lastingham, near Pickering in Yorkshire N.R., <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIII'>III, 23</ref>.</note>
Further, what ecclesiastical matters took place in
the province of the East Angles, was partly made known
to us from the writings and tradition of former men, and
partly by the account of the most reverend Abbot Esi.<note place='foot'>Nothing further is known of him.</note>
What was done with regard to the faith of Christ, and
what was the episcopal succession in the province of Lindsey,<note place='foot'>The district to the north of the Wash.</note>
we had either from the letters of the most reverend
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
prelate Cynibert,<note place='foot'>Bishop of Sidnacester, in the province of Lindsey. He died
in 732: <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>IV, 12</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIII'>V, 23</ref>.</note> or by word of mouth from other persons
of good credit. But what was done in the Church in the
different parts of the province of Northumbria from the
time when they received the faith of Christ till this present,
I received not on the authority of any one man, but
by the faithful testimony of innumerable witnesses, who
might know or remember the same; besides what I had
of my own knowledge. Wherein it is to be observed,
that what I have written concerning our most holy father,
Bishop Cuthbert,<note place='foot'>The saint and hermit who was for two years Bishop of Lindisfarne,
685-687: <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVI'>IV, 26-32</ref>. Bede wrote his life both in prose and
verse.</note> either in this volume, or in my account
of his life and actions, I partly took from what I found
written of him by the brethren of the Church of Lindisfarne,<note place='foot'>Holy Island, off the coast of Northumberland. Aidan chose
it as the place of his see and monastery in 635: <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_III_Chap_III'>III, 3</ref>.</note>
accepting without reserve the statements I found
there; but at the same time took care to add such
things as I could myself have knowledge of by the faithful
testimony of trustworthy informants. And I humbly
entreat the reader, that if he shall find in these our
writings anything not delivered according to the truth,
he will not lay the blame of it on me, for, as the true
rule of history requires, withholding nothing, I have laboured
to commit to writing such things as I could gather
from common report, for the instruction of posterity.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, I beseech all men who shall hear or read
this history of our nation, that for my infirmities both of
mind and body, they will offer up frequent intercessions
to the throne of Grace. And I further pray, that in recompense
for the labour wherewith I have recorded in
the several provinces and more important places those
events which I considered worthy of note and of interest
to their inhabitants, I may for my reward have the benefit
of their pious prayers.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Book I</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_I'/>
<head>Chap. I. Of the Situation of Britain and Ireland, and
of their ancient inhabitants.</head>

<p>
Britain, an island in the Atlantic, formerly called Albion,
lies to the north-west, facing, though at a considerable
distance, the coasts of Germany, France, and Spain,
which form the greatest part of Europe. It extends 800
miles in length towards the north, and is 200 miles in
breadth, except where several promontories extend further
in breadth, by which its compass is made to be
4,875 miles.<note place='foot'>This total varies in different authors. The first few pages of
Bede are to a great extent copied out of Pliny, Solinus, Orosius,
and Gildas.</note> To the south lies Belgic Gaul. To its
nearest shore there is an easy passage from the city of
Rutubi Portus, by the English now corrupted into Reptacaestir.<note place='foot'>Richborough, Kent.</note>
The distance from here across the sea to Gessoriacum,<note place='foot'>Boulogne.</note>
the nearest shore in the territory of the Morini,<note place='foot'>Cf. Caes., B.G., <hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>; Verg., Aen., VIII, 727.</note>
is fifty miles, or as some writers say, 450 furlongs. On
the other side of the island, where it opens upon the
boundless ocean, it has the islands called Orcades.
Britain is rich in grain and trees, and is well adapted for
feeding cattle and beasts of burden. It also produces
vines in some places, and has plenty of land and water
fowl of divers sorts; it is remarkable also for rivers
abounding in fish, and plentiful springs. It has the
greatest plenty of salmon and eels; seals are also frequently
taken, and dolphins, as also whales; besides
many sorts of shell-fish, such as mussels, in which are
often found excellent pearls of all colours, red, purple,
violet and green, but chiefly white. There is also a great
abundance of snails, of which the scarlet dye is made, a
most beautiful red, which never fades with the heat of
the sun or exposure to rain, but the older it is, the
more beautiful it becomes. It has both salt and hot
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
springs, and from them flow rivers which furnish hot
baths, proper for all ages and both sexes, in separate
places, according to their requirements. For water, as
St. Basil says,<note place='foot'>In his Hexameron.</note> receives the quality of heat, when it runs
along certain metals, and becomes not only hot but
scalding. Britain is rich also in veins of metals, as copper,
iron, lead, and silver; it produces a great deal of
excellent jet, which is black and sparkling, and burns
when put to the fire, and when set on fire, drives away
serpents; being warmed with rubbing, it attracts whatever
is applied to it, like amber. The island was formerly
distinguished by twenty-eight famous cities, besides innumerable
forts, which were all strongly secured with
walls, towers, gates, and bars. And, because it lies
almost under the North Pole, the nights are light in
summer, so that at midnight the beholders are often in
doubt whether the evening twilight still continues, or
that of the morning has come; since the sun at night
returns to the east in the northern regions without passing
far beneath the earth. For this reason the days are
of a great length in summer, and on the other hand, the
nights in winter are eighteen hours long, for the sun
then withdraws into southern parts. In like manner the
nights are very short in summer, and the days in winter,
that is, only six equinoctial hours. Whereas, in Armenia,
Macedonia, Italy, and other countries of the same latitude,
the longest day or night extends but to fifteen
hours, and the shortest to nine.
</p>

<p>
There are in the island at present, following the number
of the books in which the Divine Law was written, five<note place='foot'>Latin is included as being the ecclesiastical language common
to all. Bede does not imply that there was a Latin-speaking race
still in the island.</note>
languages of different nations employed in the study and
confession of the one self-same knowledge, which is of
highest truth and true sublimity, to wit, English, British,
Scottish, Pictish, and Latin, the last having become
common to all by the study of the Scriptures. But at
first this island had no other inhabitants but the Britons,
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
from whom it derived its name, and who, coming over
into Britain, as is reported, from Armorica,<note place='foot'>In Caesar's time, the whole district lying along the north-western
coast of Gaul, afterwards narrowed down to the modern
Brittany. That the Britons (or Brythons) came from Gaul is doubtless
a fact. Another branch of the Celtic race, the Goidels or Gaels,
appears to have been in possession in Britain before them.</note> possessed
themselves of the southern parts thereof. Starting from
the south, they had occupied the greater part of the
island, when it happened, that the nation of the Picts,
putting to sea from Scythia,<note place='foot'>By Scythia Bede means Scandinavia. He only mentions this
account as a tradition. The problem of the Picts has not been
solved yet. According to one view, they belonged to the pre-Aryan
inhabitants of Britain, pushed westward and northward by
the Celtic invaders. In Scotland they held their own for a considerable
time in a wide tract of country, and they may have to
some extent amalgamated with the Celts who dispossessed them
(Rhŷs). Others regard them as Celts of the same branch as Welsh,
Cornish, and Britons, being probably nearest to Cornish. The
absence of all but the scantiest remains of their language makes
the question of their origin one of great difficulty.</note> as is reported, in a few
ships of war, and being driven by the winds beyond the
bounds of Britain, came to Ireland and landed on its
northern shores. There, finding the nation of the Scots,
they begged to be allowed to settle among them, but
could not succeed in obtaining their request. Ireland is
the largest island next to Britain, and lies to the west of
it; but as it is shorter than Britain to the north, so, on
the other hand, it runs out far beyond it to the south,
over against the northern part of Spain, though a wide
sea lies between them. The Picts then, as has been said,
arriving in this island by sea, desired to have a place
granted them in which they might settle. The Scots
answered that the island could not contain them both;
but <q>We can give you good counsel,</q> said they, <q>whereby
you may know what to do; we know there is another
island, not far from ours, to the eastward, which we often
see at a distance, when the days are clear. If you will go
thither, you can obtain settlements; or, if any should oppose
you, we will help you.</q> The Picts, accordingly, sailing
over into Britain, began to inhabit the northern parts
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
thereof, for the Britons had possessed themselves of the
southern. Now the Picts had no wives, and asked them
of the Scots; who would not consent to grant them upon
any other terms, than that when any question should arise,
they should choose a king from the female royal race
rather than from the male: which custom, as is well
known, has been observed among the Picts to this day.<note place='foot'>The legend is an attempt to account for the law of Pictish
succession, which was vested in the mother, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Rhŷs, <q>Celtic
Britain,</q> pp. 170-171.</note>
In process of time, Britain, besides the Britons and the
Picts, received a third nation, the Scots, who, migrating
from Ireland under their leader, Reuda, either by fair
means, or by force of arms, secured to themselves those
settlements among the Picts which they still possess.
From the name of their commander, they are to this day
called Dalreudini; for, in their language, Dal signifies a
part.<note place='foot'><q>Dal,</q> a division or part, is common in Irish names. Dalriada
was a district in the north-eastern part of Ulster. From there, a
tribe of Scots (a Celtic race who settled in Ireland at some unknown
period) came to Kintyre and spread along the coasts of Argyll,
which took from them the name of Dalriada (probably <hi rend='italic'>circ.</hi> 500 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>).
They brought the Christian religion with them. Bede follows that
version of the legend which makes Cairbre Riada, the eponymous
hero of the Irish Dalriada (<hi rend='italic'>circ.</hi> 200 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>), himself found the colony
in Scotland.</note>
</p>

<p>
Ireland is broader than Britain and has a much healthier
and milder climate; for the snow scarcely ever lies there
above three days: no man makes hay in the summer for
winter's provision, or builds stables for his beasts of
burden. No reptiles are found there, and no snake can
live there; for, though snakes are often carried thither
out of Britain, as soon as the ship comes near the shore,
and the scent of the air reaches them, they die. On the
contrary, almost all things in the island are efficacious
against poison. In truth, we have known that when men
have been bitten by serpents, the scrapings of leaves of
books that were brought out of Ireland, being put into
water, and given them to drink, have immediately absorbed
the spreading poison, and assuaged the swelling.
</p>

<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>

<p>
The island abounds in milk and honey, nor is there any
lack of vines, fish, or fowl; and it is noted for the hunting
of stags and roe-deer. It is properly the country of
the Scots, who, migrating from thence, as has been said,
formed the third nation in Britain in addition to the
Britons and the Picts.
</p>

<p>
There is a very large gulf of the sea, which formerly
divided the nation of the Britons from the Picts; it runs
from the west far into the land, where, to this day, stands
a strong city of the Britons, called Alcluith.<note place='foot'>Dumbarton; <hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi> c. 12, p. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> and note.</note> The Scots,
arriving on the north side of this bay, settled themselves
there.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_II'/>
<head>Chap. II. How Caius Julius Caesar was the first Roman
that came into Britain.</head>

<p>
Now Britain had never been visited by the Romans, and
was entirely unknown to them before the time of Caius
Julius Caesar, who, in the year 693 after the foundation
of Rome, but the sixtieth year<note place='foot'>Caesar's invasion took place <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.u.c.</hi> 699 and 700; <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> 55 and 54.</note> before the Incarnation of
our Lord, was consul with Lucius Bibulus. While he
was making war upon the Germans and the Gauls,
who were divided only by the river Rhine, he came into
the province of the Morini, whence is the nearest and
shortest passage into Britain. Here, having provided
about eighty ships of burden and fast-sailing vessels, he
sailed over into Britain; where, being first roughly
handled in a battle, and then caught in a storm, he lost
a considerable part of his fleet, no small number of foot-soldiers,
and almost all his cavalry. Returning into Gaul,
he put his legions into winter-quarters, and gave orders
for building six hundred sail of both sorts. With these
he again crossed over early in spring into Britain, but,
whilst he was marching with the army against the enemy,
the ships, riding at anchor, were caught in a storm and
either dashed one against another, or driven upon the
sands and wrecked. Forty of them were lost, the rest
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
were, with much difficulty, repaired. Caesar's cavalry
was, at the first encounter, defeated by the Britons, and
there Labienus, the tribune, was slain. In the second
engagement, with great hazard to his men, he defeated
the Britons and put them to flight. Thence he proceeded
to the river Thames, where a great multitude of the enemy
had posted themselves on the farther side of the river,
under the command of Cassobellaunus,<note place='foot'>Cf. Caes., B.G., V, 11, 18 ff. A powerful British chief. His
territory lay north and north-east of the Thames, roughly comprising
Hertfordshire, Buckinghamshire, and Berkshire, but the
exact limits are uncertain. His people were the Catuvellauni (the
name is Gaulish in form).</note> and fenced the
bank of the river and almost all the ford under water with
sharp stakes: the remains of these are to be seen to this
day, apparently about the thickness of a man's thigh,
cased with lead, and fixed immovably in the bottom of the
river. This being perceived and avoided by the Romans,
the barbarians, not able to stand the charge of the
legions, hid themselves in the woods, whence they grievously
harassed the Romans with repeated sallies. In the
meantime, the strong state of the Trinovantes,<note place='foot'>Cf. Caes., B.G., V, 20. The Trinovantes occupied Essex and
part of Middlesex.</note> with
their commander Androgius,<note place='foot'>Variations of this name given by ancient authors are Andragius
and Androgorius. Caesar calls him Mandubracius.</note> surrendered to Caesar,
giving him forty hostages. Many other cities, following
their example, made a treaty with the Romans. Guided
by them, Caesar at length, after severe fighting, took the
town of Cassobellaunus,<note place='foot'>The position of this place is unknown.</note> situated between two marshes,
fortified by sheltering woods, and plentifully furnished
with all necessaries. After this, Caesar returned from
Britain into Gaul, but he had no sooner put his legions
into winter quarters, than he was suddenly beset and
distracted with wars and sudden risings on every side.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_III'/>
<head>Chap. III. How Claudius, the second of the Romans
who came into Britain, brought the islands Orcades
into subjection to the Roman empire; and Vespasian,
sent by him, reduced the Isle of Wight under the
dominion of the Romans.</head>

<p>
In the year of Rome 798,<note place='foot'>Claudius came to Britain <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.u.c.</hi> 796, 43 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> Claudius, fourth emperor from
Augustus, being desirous to approve himself a prince
beneficial to the republic, and eagerly bent upon war and
conquest on every side, undertook an expedition into
Britain, which as it appeared, was roused to rebellion by
the refusal of the Romans to give up certain deserters.
No one before or after Julius Caesar had dared to land
upon the island. Claudius crossed over to it, and within
a very few days, without any fighting or bloodshed, the
greater part of the island was surrendered into his hands.
He also added to the Roman empire the Orcades,<note place='foot'>He can only have done so in name; it was probably Agricola
who first conquered the Orkneys. Cf. Tac., Agric., 10.</note> which
lie in the ocean beyond Britain, and, returning to Rome in
the sixth month after his departure, he gave his son the
title of Britannicus. This war he concluded in the fourth
year of his reign, which is the forty-sixth from the Incarnation
of our Lord. In which year there came to pass
a most grievous famine in Syria, which is recorded in the
Acts of the Apostles to have been foretold by the prophet
Agabus.
</p>

<p>
Vespasian,<note place='foot'>Cf. Tac., Agric., 13.</note> who was emperor after Nero, being sent
into Britain by the same Claudius, brought also under
the Roman dominion the Isle of Wight, which is close
to Britain on the south, and is about thirty miles in length
from east to west, and twelve from north to south; being
six miles distant from the southern coast of Britain at
the east end, and three at the west. Nero, succeeding
Claudius in the empire, undertook no wars at all; and,
therefore, among countless other disasters brought by
him upon the Roman state, he almost lost Britain; for
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
in his time two most notable towns were there taken and
destroyed.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_IV'/>
<head>Chap. IV. How Lucius, king of Britain, writing to Pope
Eleutherus, desired to be made a Christian.</head>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 156, Marcus Antoninus Verus,<note place='foot'>Marcus Antoninus Verus, commonly called Marcus Aurelius,
succeeded in 161 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> His colleague in the empire was his adopted
brother, Lucius Verus, whose full adoptive name was Lucius
Aurelius Antoninus Verus Commodus. He died in 169. Eleutherus
became Pope between 171 and 177. Bede's chronology is therefore
wrong.</note>
the fourteenth from Augustus, was made emperor, together
with his brother, Aurelius Commodus. In their
time, whilst the holy Eleutherus presided over the Roman
Church, Lucius, king of Britain, sent a letter to him, entreating
that by a mandate from him he might be made
a Christian.<note place='foot'>Most modern authorities consider the story fabulous. But cf.
Bright, <q>Early English Church History,</q> pp. 3-5.</note> He soon obtained his pious request, and
the Britons preserved the faith, which they had received,
uncorrupted and entire, in peace and tranquillity until the
time of the Emperor Diocletian.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_V'/>
<head>Chap. V. How the Emperor Severus divided from the
rest by a rampart that part of Britain which had been
recovered.</head>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 189, Severus, an African, born
at Leptis, in the province of Tripolis, became emperor.<note place='foot'>Severus succeeded in 193 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> He died in 211.</note>
He was the seventeenth from Augustus, and reigned
seventeen years. Being naturally of a harsh disposition,
and engaged in many wars, he governed the state vigorously,
but with much trouble. Having been victorious in
all the grievous civil wars which happened in his time, he
was drawn into Britain by the revolt of almost all the confederated
tribes; and, after many great and severe battles,
he thought fit to divide that part of the island, which he
had recovered, from the other unconquered nations, not
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
with a wall, as some imagine, but with a rampart.<note place='foot'>This is the earthwork which runs parallel to the wall of Hadrian,
between the Solway and the Tyne, at an interval of from 30 to
1,300 yards from it. Its origin and purpose are doubtful. Ancient
authorities afford conflicting evidence with regard to the Roman
walls in Britain. Modern research seems to show that Severus
built no wall or rampart, though some ancient historians assert
that he did (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Haverfield, quoted by Plummer, <hi rend='italic'>ad loc.</hi>; cf. <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>
c. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XII'>12</ref> and note).</note> For a
wall is made of stones, but a rampart, with which camps
are fortified to repel the assaults of enemies, is made of
sods, cut out of the earth, and raised high above the
ground, like a wall, having in front of it the trench
whence the sods were taken, with strong stakes of wood
fixed above it. Thus Severus drew a great trench and
strong rampart, fortified with several towers, from sea
to sea. And there, at York, he fell sick afterwards and
died, leaving two sons, Bassianus and Geta;<note place='foot'>Bassianus Antoninus, surnamed Caracalla. Geta was murdered
by Caracalla.</note> of whom
Geta died, adjudged an enemy of the State; but Bassianus,
having taken the surname of Antonius, obtained
the empire.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_VI'/>
<head>Chap. VI. Of the reign of Diocletian, and how he persecuted
the Christians.</head>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 286,<note place='foot'>Diocletian succeeded in 284.</note> Diocletian, the thirty-third
from Augustus, and chosen emperor by the army, reigned
twenty years, and created Maximian, surnamed Herculius,
his colleague in the empire. In their time, one
Carausius,<note place='foot'>Carausius was a native of Menapia, in Belgium, appointed to
command the Roman fleet stationed at Boulogne to guard the
coasts. He took the fleet with him when he usurped imperial
authority in Britain. Maximian, failing to reduce him, recognized
his authority and gave him the title of Augustus. He governed
vigorously and prosperously.</note> of very mean birth, but a man of great ability
and energy, being appointed to guard the sea-coasts,
then infested by the Franks and Saxons, acted more to
the prejudice than to the advantage of the commonwealth,
by not restoring to its owners any of the booty taken
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
from the robbers, but keeping all to himself; thus giving
rise to the suspicion that by intentional neglect he suffered
the enemy to infest the frontiers. When, therefore, an
order was sent by Maximian that he should be put to
death, he took upon him the imperial purple, and possessed
himself of Britain, and having most valiantly
conquered and held it for the space of seven years, he
was at length put to death by the treachery of his associate
Allectus.<note place='foot'>Allectus was a follower of Carausius. His revolt was apparently
supported by the independent tribes, probably Caledonians.</note> The usurper, having thus got the island
from Carausius, held it three years, and was then vanquished
by Asclepiodotus,<note place='foot'>Asclepiodotus was serving under Constantius Chlorus (one of
the reigning Caesars), who sailed to Britain and marched against
Allectus.</note> the captain of the Praetorian
guards, who thus at the end of ten years restored Britain
to the Roman empire.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile, Diocletian in the east, and Maximian Herculius
in the west, commanded the churches to be destroyed,
and the Christians to be persecuted and slain.
This persecution was the tenth since the reign of Nero,
and was more lasting and cruel than almost any before it;
for it was carried on incessantly for the space of ten years,
with burning of churches, proscription of innocent persons,
and the slaughter of martyrs. Finally, Britain also attained
to the great glory of bearing faithful witness to God.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. VII. The Passion of St. Alban and his companions,
who at that time shed their blood for our Lord.</head>

<p>
At that time suffered St. Alban,<note place='foot'>The statement that the Diocletian persecution extended to
Britain rests on no trustworthy evidence at all. Yet though the
time assigned is probably wrong, there seems to be no reason to
doubt the existence of the British Protomartyr. The story rests
upon a local tradition traceable up to the visit of Germanus in
429 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XVIII'>18</ref>.</note> of whom the priest
Fortunatus,<note place='foot'>Venantius Fortunatus, a Christian poet, Bishop of Poitiers,
b. 530 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> He was the last Latin poet of any note in Gaul.</note> in the Praise of Virgins, where he makes
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
mention of the blessed martyrs that came to the Lord
from all parts of the world, says:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>And fruitful Britain noble Alban rears.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
This Alban, being yet a pagan, at the time when at
the bidding of unbelieving rulers all manner of cruelty
was practised against the Christians, gave entertainment
in his house to a certain clerk,<note place='foot'>In the lives of St. Alban (all later than Bede) this clerk is called
St. Amphibalus, a name probably invented from his cloak (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>amphibalus</foreign>).</note> flying from his persecutors.
This man he observed to be engaged in continual prayer
and watching day and night; when on a sudden the Divine
grace shining on him, he began to imitate the example
of faith and piety which was set before him, and being
gradually instructed by his wholesome admonitions, he
cast off the darkness of idolatry, and became a Christian
in all sincerity of heart. The aforesaid clerk having been
some days entertained by him, it came to the ears of the
impious prince, that a confessor of Christ, to whom a
martyr's place had not yet been assigned, was concealed
at Alban's house. Whereupon he sent some soldiers to
make a strict search after him. When they came to the
martyr's hut, St. Alban presently came forth to the
soldiers, instead of his guest and master, in the habit or
long coat which he wore, and was bound and led before
the judge.
</p>

<p>
It happened that the judge, at the time when Alban
was carried before him, was standing at the altar, and
offering sacrifice to devils. When he saw Alban, being
much enraged that he should thus, of his own accord,
dare to put himself into the hands of the soldiers, and
incur such danger on behalf of the guest whom he had
harboured, he commanded him to be dragged to the
images of the devils, before which he stood, saying,
<q>Because you have chosen to conceal a rebellious and
sacrilegious man, rather than to deliver him up to the
soldiers, that his contempt of the gods might meet with
the penalty due to such blasphemy, you shall undergo all
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
the punishment that was due to him, if you seek to
abandon the worship of our religion.</q> But St. Alban,
who had voluntarily declared himself a Christian to the
persecutors of the faith, was not at all daunted by the
prince's threats, but putting on the armour of spiritual
warfare, publicly declared that he would not obey his
command. Then said the judge, <q>Of what family or
race are you?</q>&mdash;<q>What does it concern you,</q> answered
Alban, <q>of what stock I am? If you desire to hear the
truth of my religion, be it known to you, that I am now
a Christian, and free to fulfil Christian duties.</q>&mdash;<q>I ask
your name,</q> said the judge; <q>tell me it immediately.</q>&mdash;<q>I
am called Alban by my parents,</q> replied he; <q>and I
worship ever and adore the true and living God, Who
created all things.</q> Then the judge, filled with anger,
said, <q>If you would enjoy the happiness of eternal life,
do not delay to offer sacrifice to the great gods.</q> Alban
rejoined, <q>These sacrifices, which by you are offered to
devils, neither can avail the worshippers, nor fulfil the
desires and petitions of the suppliants. Rather, whosoever
shall offer sacrifice to these images, shall receive the
everlasting pains of hell for his reward.</q>
</p>

<p>
The judge, hearing these words, and being much incensed,
ordered this holy confessor of God to be scourged
by the executioners, believing that he might by stripes
shake that constancy of heart, on which he could not prevail
by words. He, being most cruelly tortured, bore the
same patiently, or rather joyfully, for our Lord's sake.
When the judge perceived that he was not to be overcome
by tortures, or withdrawn from the exercise of the Christian
religion, he ordered him to be put to death. Being
led to execution, he came to a river, which, with a most
rapid course, ran between the wall of the town and the
arena where he was to be executed.<note place='foot'>The text of this passage is probably corrupt, but all the MSS.
agree. I believe the above gives the intended meaning.</note> He there saw a great
multitude of persons of both sexes, and of divers ages
and conditions, who were doubtless assembled by Divine
inspiration, to attend the blessed confessor and martyr,
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
and had so filled the bridge over the river, that he could
scarce pass over that evening. In truth, almost all had
gone out, so that the judge remained in the city without
attendance. St. Alban, therefore, urged by an ardent
and devout wish to attain the sooner to martyrdom, drew
near to the stream, and lifted up his eyes to heaven,
whereupon the channel was immediately dried up, and
he perceived that the water had given place and made
way for him to pass. Among the rest, the executioner,
who should have put him to death, observed this, and
moved doubtless by Divine inspiration hastened to meet
him at the appointed place of execution, and casting
away the sword which he had carried ready drawn, fell
at his feet, praying earnestly that he might rather be
accounted worthy to suffer with the martyr, whom he
was ordered to execute, or, if possible, instead of him.
</p>

<p>
Whilst he was thus changed from a persecutor into a
companion in the faith and truth, and the other executioners
rightly hesitated to take up the sword which was
lying on the ground, the holy confessor, accompanied by
the multitude, ascended a hill, about half a mile from
the arena, beautiful, as was fitting, and of most pleasing
appearance, adorned, or rather clothed, everywhere with
flowers of many colours, nowhere steep or precipitous or
of sheer descent, but with a long, smooth natural slope,
like a plain, on its sides, a place altogether worthy from
of old, by reason of its native beauty, to be consecrated
by the blood of a blessed martyr. On the top of this hill,
St. Alban prayed that God would give him water, and
immediately a living spring, confined in its channel,
sprang up at his feet, so that all men acknowledged
that even the stream had yielded its service to the martyr.
For it was impossible that the martyr, who had left no
water remaining in the river, should desire it on the top
of the hill, unless he thought it fitting. The river then
having done service and fulfilled the pious duty, returned
to its natural course, leaving a testimony of its obedience.<note place='foot'>There is again probably some confusion in the text.</note>
Here, therefore, the head of the undaunted martyr was
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
struck off, and here he received the crown of life, which
God has promised to them that love him. But he who
laid impious hands on the holy man's neck was not permitted
to rejoice over his dead body; for his eyes dropped
upon the ground at the same moment as the blessed
martyr's head fell.
</p>

<p>
At the same time was also beheaded the soldier, who
before, through the Divine admonition, refused to strike
the holy confessor. Of whom it is apparent, that though
he was not purified by the waters of baptism, yet he was
cleansed by the washing of his own blood, and rendered
worthy to enter the kingdom of heaven. Then the judge,
astonished at the unwonted sight of so many heavenly
miracles, ordered the persecution to cease immediately,
and began to honour the death of the saints, by which
he once thought that they might have been turned from
their zeal for the Christian faith. The blessed Alban
suffered death on the twenty-second day of June, near
the city of Verulam,<note place='foot'>Now St. Albans in Hertfordshire, on the Watling Street, hence
probably the name, Vaeclingacaestir.</note> which is now by the English nation
called Verlamacaestir, or Vaeclingacaestir, where afterwards,
when peaceable Christian times were restored, a
church of wonderful workmanship, and altogether worthy
to commemorate his martyrdom, was erected.<note place='foot'>The place was afterwards called Holmhurst. The church
mentioned by Bede was superseded by the monastery of St.
Alban, the foundation of which is attributed to Offa, <hi rend='italic'>circ.</hi> 793 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
Certain extraordinary privileges were granted to it, and its abbot
obtained a superiority over all other English abbots (Dugdale,
<q>Monasticon</q>).</note> In which
place the cure of sick persons and the frequent working
of wonders cease not to this day.
</p>

<p>
At that time suffered Aaron and Julius,<note place='foot'>The evidence for their martyrdom is very doubtful.</note> citizens of
the City of Legions,<note place='foot'>Caerleon-on-Usk, the headquarters of the Second legion, is
here meant (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Merivale, H.R., vi, 248), though the name was also
applied to Chester, seat of the Twentieth legion (cf. II, 2, p. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>,
<q>civitas legionum</q>).</note> and many more of both sexes in
divers places; who, after that they had endured sundry
torments, and their limbs had been mangled after an unheard-of
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
manner, when their warfare was accomplished,
yielded their souls up to the joys of the heavenly city.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_VIII'/>
<head>Chap. VIII. How, when the persecution ceased, the
Church in Britain enjoyed peace till the time of the
Arian heresy.</head>

<p>
When the storm of persecution ceased, the faithful
Christians, who, during the time of danger, had hidden
themselves in woods and deserts and secret caves, came
forth and rebuilt the churches which had been levelled
to the ground; founded, erected, and finished the
cathedrals raised in honour of the holy martyrs, and, as
if displaying their conquering standards in all places,
celebrated festivals and performed their sacred rites with
pure hearts and lips. This peace continued in the Christian
churches of Britain until the time of the Arian madness,
which, having corrupted the whole world, infected
this island also, so far removed from the rest of the
world, with the poison of its error; and when once a way
was opened across the sea for that plague, straightway
all the taint of every heresy fell upon the island, ever
desirous to hear some new thing, and never holding firm
to any sure belief.
</p>

<p>
At this time Constantius, who, whilst Diocletian was
alive, governed Gaul and Spain, a man of great clemency
and urbanity, died in Britain. This man left his son
Constantine,<note place='foot'>Constantine the Great. For the legality of the marriage, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi>
Dict. of Christian Biography, article <q>Helena.</q></note> born of Helena, his concubine, emperor of
the Gauls. Eutropius writes that Constantine, being
created emperor in Britain, succeeded his father in the
sovereignty. In his time the Arian heresy broke out, and
although it was exposed and condemned in the Council of
Nicaea,<note place='foot'>The First General Council, 325 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> It asserted the doctrine
of the ὁμοούσιον against Arius. For a short account of the heresy,
<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Gore, Bampton Lectures, pp. 89-92. All the evidence goes to
show that this heresy affected Britain much less than Bede, on
the authority of Gildas, here implies.</note> nevertheless, the deadly poison of its evil spread,
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
as has been said, to the Churches in the islands, as well
as to those of the rest of the world.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_IX'/>
<head>Chap. IX. How during the reign of Gratian, Maximus,
being created Emperor in Britain, returned into Gaul
with a mighty army.</head>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 377,<note place='foot'>Valens died 378.</note> Gratian, the fortieth from
Augustus, held the empire for six years after the death
of Valens; though he had long before reigned with his
uncle Valens, and his brother Valentinian. Finding the
condition of the commonwealth much impaired, and
almost gone to ruin, and impelled by the necessity of
restoring it, he invested the Spaniard, Theodosius, with
the purple at Sirmium, and made him emperor of Thrace
and the Eastern provinces. At that time, Maximus,<note place='foot'>Another of the insular usurpers (cf. c. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_VI'>6</ref>). He had served under
the elder Theodosius in Britain. He revolted from Rome, successfully
repressed incursions of Picts and Scots, then crossed to Gaul,
where he maintained himself for four years, but was killed by the
Emperor, the younger Theodosius, at Aquileia, in 388.</note> a
man of energy and probity, and worthy of the title of
Augustus, if he had not broken his oath of allegiance,
was made emperor by the army somewhat against his
will, passed over into Gaul, and there by treachery slew
the Emperor Gratian, who in consternation at his sudden
invasion, was attempting to escape into Italy. His
brother, the Emperor Valentinian, expelled from Italy,
fled into the East, where he was entertained by Theodosius
with fatherly affection, and soon restored to the
empire, for Maximus the tyrant, being shut up in Aquileia,
was there taken by them and put to death.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_X'/>
<head>Chap. X. How, in the reign of Arcadius, Pelagius, a
Briton, insolently impugned the Grace of God.</head>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 394,<note place='foot'>The real date is 395.</note> Arcadius, the son of Theodosius,
the forty-third from Augustus, succeeding to
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
the empire, with his brother Honorius, held it thirteen
years. In his time, Pelagius,<note place='foot'>Pelagius, the founder of the heresy known as Pelagianism, was
probably born in 370 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, and is said to have been a Briton, but
the tradition that his real name was Morgan (Marigena, Graecised
Πελάγιος), and that he was a native of Bangor, rests on very doubtful
authority. His great opponent, St. Augustine, speaks of him
as a good and holy man; later slanders are to be attributed to
Jerome's abusive language. The cardinal point in his doctrine is
his denial of original sin, involving a too great reliance on the
human will in achieving holiness, and a limitation of the action of
the grace of God.</note> a Briton, spread far and
near the infection of his perfidious doctrine, denying the
assistance of the Divine grace, being seconded therein
by his associate Julianus of Campania,<note place='foot'>Julianus of Campania is regarded as the founder of semi-Pelagianism,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, an intermediate position between the orthodox
view and the heresy of Pelagius. He was Bishop of Eclanum,
near Beneventum, and was along with seventeen other Italian
bishops deposed in 418 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> for refusing to sign the circular letter of
Pope Zosimus condemning the heresy.</note> who was impelled
by an uncontrolled desire to recover his bishopric, of
which he had been deprived. St. Augustine, and the
other orthodox fathers, quoted many thousand catholic
authorities against them, but failed to amend their folly;
nay, more, their madness being rebuked was rather increased
by contradiction than suffered by them to be
purified through adherence to the truth; which Prosper,
the rhetorician,<note place='foot'>A native of Aquitaine, born probably about 403 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, a strong
opponent of the Pelagians. It is uncertain whether he was in Holy
Orders or not. He wrote in prose and verse; his longest poem is
called <q>De Ingratis</q> (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, opponents of the grace of God). His
best known work is a Chronicle, not to be confused with the
shorter chronicle of Prosper Tiro.</note> has beautifully expressed thus in heroic<note place='foot'>Bede includes elegiacs under this term, cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_VIII'>V, 8</ref>.</note>
verse:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
They tell that one, erewhile consumed with gnawing spite,
snake-like attacked Augustine in his writings. Who urged the
wretched viper to raise from the ground his head, howsoever hidden
in dens of darkness? Either the sea-girt Britons reared him with
the fruit of their soil, or fed on Campanian pastures his heart
swells with pride.
</quote>

</div>

<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_XI'/>
<head>Chap. XI. How during the reign of Honorius, Gratian
and Constantine were created tyrants in Britain; and
soon after the former was slain in Britain, and the latter
in Gaul.</head>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 407,<note place='foot'>The date of Honorius is correct, but the invasion of Alaric is
put a year too late, if Bede refers to the first siege of Rome, in 408.</note> Honorius, the younger son
of Theodosius, and the forty-fourth from Augustus, being
emperor, two years before the invasion of Rome by
Alaric, king of the Goths, when the nations of the Alani,
Suevi, Vandals, and many others with them, having
defeated the Franks and passed the Rhine, ravaged all
Gaul, Gratianus, a citizen of the country, was set up as
tyrant in Britain and killed. In his place, Constantine,
one of the meanest soldiers, only for the hope afforded by
his name, and without any worth to recommend him, was
chosen emperor. As soon as he had taken upon him
the command, he crossed over into Gaul, where being
often imposed upon by the barbarians with untrustworthy
treaties, he did more harm than good to the Commonwealth.<note place='foot'>The British army, alarmed by the inroads of barbarians, and
actuated by a spirit of revolt against Roman authority, set up
three local emperors in rapid succession: Marcus, Gratian, and
Constantine. The first two they summarily deposed and killed,
but Constantine by a great victory made himself master of Gaul
and Britain and extorted from the Emperor Honorius a share in
the Imperial authority. Meanwhile, the Britons expelled the few
remaining Roman officials, and Honorius avenged himself on Constantine
for the loss of Britain in the manner described in the text.</note>
Whereupon Count Constantius,<note place='foot'>A Roman general, afterwards associated with Honorius in
the empire for a few months.</note> by the command
of Honorius, marching into Gaul with an army,
besieged him in the city of Arles, took him prisoner, and
put him to death. His son Constans, a monk, whom
he had created Caesar, was also put to death by his own
follower Count Gerontius,<note place='foot'>Gerontius (Welsh <foreign lang='cy' rend='italic'>Geraint</foreign>, akin to Irish <foreign lang='ga' rend='italic'>Gerat</foreign> or <foreign lang='ga' rend='italic'>Gerait</foreign>, a
champion), was a Briton, one of Constantine's generals. Turning
against his master, he invited the Germans to invade Gaul and
Britain, probably intending to secure Britain for himself. But his
own men conspired against him and he died by his own hand.</note> at Vienne.
</p>

<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>

<p>
Rome was taken by the Goths, in the year from its
foundation, 1164.<note place='foot'>Rome was taken 1163 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.u.c.</hi>; 410 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> Then the Romans ceased to rule in
Britain, almost 470 years after Caius Julius Caesar
came to the island. They dwelt within the rampart,
which, as we have mentioned, Severus made across the
island, on the south side of it, as the cities, watch-towers,<note place='foot'>Possibly <q>light-houses.</q></note>
bridges, and paved roads there made testify
to this day; but they had a right of dominion over the
farther parts of Britain, as also over the islands that are
beyond Britain.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_XII'/>
<head>Chap. XII. How the Britons, being ravaged by the
Scots and Picts, sought succour from the Romans, who
coming a second time, built a wall across the island; but
when this was broken down at once by the aforesaid
enemies, they were reduced to greater distress than
before.</head>

<p>
From that time, the British part of Britain, destitute of
armed soldiers, of all military stores, and of the whole
flower of its active youth, who had been led away by
the rashness of the tyrants never to return, was wholly
exposed to rapine, the people being altogether ignorant
of the use of weapons. Whereupon they suffered many
years from the sudden invasions of two very savage
nations from beyond the sea, the Scots from the west,
and the Picts from the north. We call these nations from
beyond the sea, not on account of their being seated out
of Britain, but because they were separated from that part
of it which was possessed by the Britons, two broad and
long inlets of the sea lying between them, one of which
runs into the interior of Britain, from the Eastern Sea,
and the other from the Western, though they do not reach
so far as to touch one another. The eastern has in the
midst of it the city Giudi.<note place='foot'>Probably Inchkeith in the Forth. The Irish called the Firth of
Forth the <q>Sea of Giudan</q> (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Reeves' <q>Culdees,</q> p. 124). But
Professor Rhŷs is inclined to think that Bede has confused the
island Giudi with Urbs Giudi, which may perhaps be identified
with the Urbs Iudeu of Nennius, probably either Carriden or Edinburgh
(Rhŷs, <q>Celtic Britain</q>).</note> On the Western Sea, that is,
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
on its right shore, stands the city of Alcluith,<note place='foot'>Alcluith is the Welsh name (Ail = a rock). The Goidels called it
Dúnbrettan = the fortress of the Britons. Hence its modern name,
Dumbarton. The river is, of course, the Clyde.</note> which in
their language signifies the Rock Cluith, for it is close by
the river of that name.
</p>

<p>
On account of the attacks of these nations, the Britons
sent messengers to Rome with letters piteously praying
for succour, and promising perpetual subjection, provided
that the impending enemy should be driven away.
An armed legion was immediately sent them, which,
arriving in the island, and engaging the enemy, slew a
great multitude of them, drove the rest out of the territories
of their allies, and having in the meanwhile delivered
them from their worst distress, advised them to build a
wall between the two seas across the island, that it
might secure them by keeping off the enemy. So they
returned home with great triumph. But the islanders
building the wall which they had been told to raise, not
of stone, since they had no workmen capable of such a
work, but of sods, made it of no use. Nevertheless, they
carried it for many miles between the two bays or inlets
of the sea of which we have spoken;<note place='foot'>This is the earthen rampart, about thirty-five miles in length,
between the Clyde and the Forth, now attributed to Antoninus
Pius. Little is known about it, and it is probable that it was soon
abandoned.</note> to the end that
where the protection of the water was wanting, they
might use the rampart to defend their borders from the
irruptions of the enemies. Of the work there erected,
that is, of a rampart of great breadth and height, there
are evident remains to be seen at this day. It begins at
about two miles' distance from the monastery of Aebbercurnig,<note place='foot'>Abercorn, a village on the south bank of the Firth of Forth.</note>
west of it, at a place called in the Pictish
language Peanfahel,<note place='foot'>The name is probably Celtic (Goidelic), though, if the view
which regards the Picts as a non-Celtic people be correct, it may
show traces of Pictish influence. It seems to be connected with
the Latin term <q>penna valli</q> = wing of (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, pinnacle or turret at
end of) the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vallum</foreign>. Readers of Scott's <q>Antiquary</q> will remember
the celebrated dispute with regard to this word. The Anglian
<foreign rend='italic'>Penneltun</foreign> is derived from the Goidelic name.</note> but in the English tongue, Penneltun,
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
and running westward, ends near the city of
Alcluith.
</p>

<p>
But the former enemies, when they perceived that the
Roman soldiers were gone, immediately coming by sea,
broke into the borders, trampled and overran all places,
and like men mowing ripe corn, bore down all before
them. Hereupon messengers were again sent to Rome
miserably imploring aid, lest their wretched country
should be utterly blotted out, and the name of a Roman
province, so long renowned among them, overthrown by
the cruelties of foreign races, might become utterly contemptible.
A legion was accordingly sent again, and,
arriving unexpectedly in autumn, made great slaughter
of the enemy, obliging all those that could escape, to flee
beyond the sea; whereas before, they were wont yearly
to carry off their booty without any opposition. Then
the Romans declared to the Britons, that they could not
for the future undertake such troublesome expeditions for
their sake, and advised them rather to take up arms and
make an effort to engage their enemies, who could not
prove too powerful for them, unless they themselves
were enervated by cowardice. Moreover, thinking that
it might be some help to the allies, whom they were
forced to abandon, they constructed a strong stone wall
from sea to sea, in a straight line between the towns
that had been there built for fear of the enemy, where
Severus also had formerly built a rampart.<note place='foot'>This probably refers to the wall now attributed to Hadrian
(<hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_V'>5</ref> note). It ran for a distance of about eighty-five miles from
Bowness-on-Solway to Wallsend-on-Tyne. Bede's authorities are
Orosius and Gildas. The accounts he gives here and in c. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_V'>5</ref> are
an attempt to explain the difficulties and conflicting evidence with
regard to these walls.</note> This famous
wall, which is still to be seen, was raised at public and
private expense, the Britons also lending their assistance.
It is eight feet in breadth, and twelve in height, in
a straight line from east to west, as is still evident to
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
beholders. This being presently finished, they gave the
dispirited people good advice, and showed them how to
furnish themselves with arms. Besides, they built towers
to command a view of the sea, at intervals, on the
southern coast, where their ships lay, because there also
the invasions of the barbarians were apprehended, and
so took leave of their allies, never to return again.
</p>

<p>
After their departure to their own country, the Scots
and Picts, understanding that they had refused to return,
at once came back, and growing more confident than
they had been before, occupied all the northern and
farthest part of the island, driving out the natives, as far
as the wall. Hereupon a timorous guard was placed upon
the fortification, where, dazed with fear, they became
ever more dispirited day by day. On the other side, the
enemy constantly attacked them with barbed weapons,
by which the cowardly defenders were dragged in piteous
fashion from the wall, and dashed against the ground.
At last, the Britons, forsaking their cities and wall, took
to flight and were scattered. The enemy pursued, and
forthwith followed a massacre more grievous than ever
before; for the wretched natives were torn in pieces by
their enemies, as lambs are torn by wild beasts. Thus,
being expelled from their dwellings and lands, they saved
themselves from the immediate danger of starvation by
robbing and plundering one another, adding to the
calamities inflicted by the enemy their own domestic
broils, till the whole country was left destitute of food
except such as could be procured in the chase.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_XIII'/>
<head>Chap. XIII. How in the reign of Theodosius the younger,
in whose time Palladius was sent to the Scots that believed
in Christ, the Britons begging assistance of Ætius, the
consul, could not obtain it. [446 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 423, Theodosius, the younger,
the forty-fifth from Augustus, succeeded Honorius and
governed the Roman empire twenty-six years. In the
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
eighth year of his reign,<note place='foot'>In 431 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> There is much confusion with regard to the mission
of Palladius. According to later accounts, he was an unsuccessful
forerunner of St. Patrick, but Bede here, following Prosper of
Aquitaine, represents the Irish (Scotti) as in part already Christian.
The origin of Irish Christianity is very obscure, and some have
even doubted the existence of St. Patrick. Bede only mentions
him once, viz., in the <q>Martyrology,</q> which has been largely interpolated,
and is, perhaps, not his genuine work. St. Patrick's latest
biographer, Professor Bury, has, however, clearly established a
certain amount of fact underlying much legendary matter. Some
later authorities represent Palladius as preaching to the Scots (in
the modern sense) and Patrick to the Irish.</note> Palladius was sent by Celestinus,
the Roman pontiff, to the Scots that believed in Christ,
to be their first bishop. In the twenty-third year of his
reign, Aetius,<note place='foot'>The great Roman general who preserved the Western Empire
against the invasions of the barbarians for many years. He was
assassinated by Valentinian in 454 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> a man of note and a patrician, discharged
his third consulship with Symmachus for his colleague.
To him the wretched remnant of the Britons sent a letter,
which began thus:&mdash;<q>To Aetius, thrice Consul, the
groans of the Britons.</q> And in the sequel of the letter
they thus unfolded their woes:&mdash;<q>The barbarians drive
us to the sea; the sea drives us back to the barbarians:
between them we are exposed to two sorts of death; we
are either slaughtered or drowned.</q> Yet, for all this,
they could not obtain any help from him, as he was then
engaged in most serious wars with Bledla and Attila,
kings of the Huns. And though the year before this<note place='foot'>Really two years before, 444 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
Bledla had been murdered by the treachery of his own
brother Attila, yet Attila himself remained so intolerable
an enemy to the Republic, that he ravaged almost all
Europe, attacking and destroying cities and castles. At
the same time there was a famine at Constantinople, and
soon after a plague followed; moreover, a great part of
the wall of that city, with fifty-seven towers, fell to the
ground. Many cities also went to ruin, and the famine
and pestilential state of the air destroyed thousands of
men and cattle.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. XIV. How the Britons, compelled by the great
famine, drove the barbarians out of their territories;
and soon after there ensued, along with abundance of
corn, decay of morals, pestilence, and the downfall of
the nation.</head>

<p>
In the meantime, the aforesaid famine distressing the
Britons more and more, and leaving to posterity a lasting
memory of its mischievous effects, obliged many of
them to submit themselves to the depredators; though
others still held out, putting their trust in God, when
human help failed. These continually made raids from
the mountains, caves, and woods, and, at length, began
to inflict severe losses on their enemies, who had been
for so many years plundering the country. The bold
Irish robbers thereupon returned home, intending to
come again before long. The Picts then settled down in
the farthest part of the island and afterwards remained
there, but they did not fail to plunder and harass the
Britons from time to time.
</p>

<p>
Now, when the ravages of the enemy at length abated,
the island began to abound with such plenty of grain as
had never been known in any age before; along with
plenty, evil living increased, and this was immediately
attended by the taint of all manner of crime; in particular,
cruelty, hatred of truth, and love of falsehood;
insomuch, that if any one among them happened to be
milder than the rest, and more inclined to truth, all the
rest abhorred and persecuted him unrestrainedly, as if
he had been the enemy of Britain. Nor were the laity
only guilty of these things, but even our Lord's own
flock, with its shepherds, casting off the easy yoke of
Christ, gave themselves up to drunkenness, enmity,
quarrels, strife, envy, and other such sins. In the meantime,
on a sudden, a grievous plague fell upon that
corrupt generation, which soon destroyed such numbers
of them, that the living scarcely availed to bury the dead:
yet, those that survived, could not be recalled from the
spiritual death, which they had incurred through their
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
sins, either by the death of their friends, or the fear of
death. Whereupon, not long after, a more severe vengeance
for their fearful crimes fell upon the sinful nation.
They held a council to determine what was to be done,
and where they should seek help to prevent or repel the
cruel and frequent incursions of the northern nations;
and in concert with their King Vortigern,<note place='foot'>Though he is the subject of many legends, Vortigern is doubtless
a historical figure, a ruler of south-eastern Britain. Bede's form
of the name, Uurtigernus, is right. It is a British word, meaning
<q>supreme lord</q> (Rhŷs).</note> it was unanimously
decided to call the Saxons to their aid from beyond
the sea, which, as the event plainly showed, was brought
about by the Lord's will, that evil might fall upon them
for their wicked deeds.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_XV'/>
<head>Chap. XV. How the Angles, being invited into Britain,
at first drove off the enemy; but not long after, making
a league with them, turned their weapons against their
allies.</head>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 449,<note place='foot'>The date of Marcian's succession is 450.</note> Marcian, the forty-sixth from
Augustus, being made emperor with Valentinian, ruled
the empire seven years. Then the nation of the Angles,
or Saxons,<note place='foot'>Bede only professes to give the date of the invasion approximately:
cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIV'>V, 24</ref> (<q>quorum tempore</q>), <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXIII'>I, 23</ref>; <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XIV'>II, 14</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIII'>V, 23</ref> (<q>circiter</q>),
calculating in round numbers apparently. He refers here
to their first settlement, which, of course, does not preclude earlier
attacks.</note> being invited by the aforesaid king,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, Vortigern.</note> arrived
in Britain with three ships of war and had a place in
which to settle assigned to them by the same king, in
the eastern part of the island, on the pretext of fighting
in defence of their country, whilst their real intentions
were to conquer it. Accordingly they engaged with the
enemy, who were come from the north to give battle,
and the Saxons obtained the victory. When the news of
their success and of the fertility of the country, and the
cowardice of the Britons, reached their own home, a
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
more considerable fleet was quickly sent over, bringing
a greater number of men, and these, being added to the
former army, made up an invincible force. The newcomers
received of the Britons a place to inhabit among
them, upon condition that they should wage war against
their enemies for the peace and security of the country,
whilst the Britons agreed to furnish them with pay.
Those who came over were of the three most powerful
nations of Germany&mdash;Saxons, Angles, and Jutes. From
the Jutes are descended the people of Kent, and of the
Isle of Wight, including those in the province of the
West-Saxons who are to this day called Jutes, seated
opposite to the Isle of Wight. From the Saxons, that
is, the country which is now called Old Saxony, came
the East-Saxons, the South-Saxons, and the West-Saxons.
From the Angles, that is, the country which is
called Angulus,<note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Anglia</foreign> was believed to be derived from <foreign rend='italic'>Angulus</foreign>. The country
is the modern Schleswig, which the Angles appear to have almost
entirely evacuated. For the Continental Saxons, cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_IX'>V, 9</ref>. It has
been supposed that the Jutes came from Jutland, where, at a later
period, they mingled with the Danes (<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>), but this is now regarded
as doubtful.</note> and which is said, from that time, to
have remained desert to this day, between the provinces
of the Jutes and the Saxons, are descended the East-Angles,
the Midland-Angles, the Mercians, all the race of
the Northumbrians, that is, of those nations that dwell
on the north side of the river Humber, and the other
nations of the Angles. The first commanders are said
to have been the two brothers Hengist and Horsa.
Of these Horsa was afterwards slain in battle by the
Britons,<note place='foot'>At Aylesford, in Kent. Horsted is the traditional burial-place
of Horsa.</note> and a monument, bearing his name, is still
in existence in the eastern parts of Kent. They were
the sons of Victgilsus, whose father was Vitta, son of
Vecta, son of Woden; from whose stock the royal
race of many provinces trace their descent. In a short
time, swarms of the aforesaid nations came over into the
island, and the foreigners began to increase so much,
that they became a source of terror to the natives themselves
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
who had invited them. Then, having on a sudden
entered into league with the Picts, whom they had by
this time repelled by force of arms, they began to turn
their weapons against their allies. At first, they obliged
them to furnish a greater quantity of provisions; and,
seeking an occasion of quarrel, protested, that unless
more plentiful supplies were brought them, they would
break the league, and ravage all the island; nor were
they backward in putting their threats into execution.
In short, the fire kindled by the hands of the pagans,
proved God's just vengeance for the crimes of the people;
not unlike that which, being of old lighted by the Chaldeans,
consumed the walls and all the buildings of Jerusalem.
For here, too, through the agency of the pitiless
conqueror, yet by the disposal of the just Judge, it
ravaged all the neighbouring cities and country, spread
the conflagration from the eastern to the western sea,
without any opposition, and overran the whole face of
the doomed island. Public as well as private buildings
were overturned; the priests were everywhere slain
before the altars; no respect was shown for office, the
prelates with the people were destroyed with fire and
sword; nor were there any left to bury those who had been
thus cruelly slaughtered. Some of the miserable remnant,
being taken in the mountains, were butchered in heaps.
Others, spent with hunger, came forth and submitted
themselves to the enemy, to undergo for the sake of food
perpetual servitude, if they were not killed upon the
spot. Some, with sorrowful hearts, fled beyond the seas.
Others, remaining in their own country, led a miserable
life of terror and anxiety of mind among the mountains,
woods and crags.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_XVI'/>
<head>Chap. XVI. How the Britons obtained their first victory
over the Angles, under the command of Ambrosius, a
Roman.</head>

<p>
When the army of the enemy, having destroyed and dispersed
the natives, had returned home to their own
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
settlements,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, in Thanet.</note> the Britons began by degrees to take heart,
and gather strength, sallying out of the lurking places
where they had concealed themselves, and with one
accord imploring the Divine help, that they might not
utterly be destroyed. They had at that time for their
leader, Ambrosius Aurelianus,<note place='foot'>The most probable view is that he was the last of those
Romans who usurped imperial authority in Britain (<hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> cc. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_VI'>6</ref>, <ref target='Book_I_Chap_IX'>9</ref>).</note> a man of worth, who
alone, by chance, of the Roman nation had survived the
storm, in which his parents, who were of the royal race,
had perished. Under him the Britons revived, and offering
battle to the victors, by the help of God, gained
the victory. From that day, sometimes the natives, and
sometimes their enemies, prevailed, till the year of the
siege of Badon-hill,<note place='foot'>The identification of this place with Badbury, in Dorsetshire
(Guest, followed by Freeman and Green) seems to be disproved
(W. H. Stevenson, in the <q>English Historical Review,</q> xvii, pp.
633, 634). The locality is quite uncertain; Skene actually places it
near Linlithgow. According to Bede's reckoning the date of the
battle would be 493 approximately. The <q>Annales Cambriae</q>
give 516. For a full discussion of the question, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Plummer, <hi rend='italic'>ad loc.</hi>
Cf. also Mr. Stevenson's article.</note> when they made no small slaughter
of those enemies, about forty-four years after their arrival
in England. But of this hereafter.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_XVII'/>
<head>Chap. XVII. How Germanus the Bishop, sailing into
Britain with Lupus, first quelled the tempest of the sea,
and afterwards that of the Pelagians, by Divine power.
[429 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Some few years before their arrival, the Pelagian heresy,
brought over by Agricola, the son of Severianus,<note place='foot'>Nothing more is known of them. Pelagius left Britain in early
life and did not himself spread his heresy there.</note> a
Pelagian bishop, had corrupted with its foul taint the
faith of the Britons. But whereas they absolutely refused
to embrace that perverse doctrine, and blaspheme the
grace of Christ, yet were not able of themselves to confute
the subtilty of the unholy belief by force of argument,
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
they bethought them of wholesome counsels and
determined to crave aid of the Gallican prelates in that
spiritual warfare. Hereupon, these, having assembled a
great synod, consulted together to determine what persons
should be sent thither to sustain the faith, and by
unanimous consent, choice was made of the apostolic
prelates, Germanus, Bishop of Auxerre, and Lupus of
Troyes,<note place='foot'>The life of Germanus was written by Constantius, a priest of
Lyons, who is Bede's authority for cc. 17-21. According to him,
these bishops were sent to Britain by a Gallican Synod. Prosper of
Aquitaine attributes the origin of the mission to Pope Celestine,
<q>acting on the advice of the deacon Palladius</q> (probably the
missionary to the Irish mentioned c. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XIII'>13</ref>). The two statements are
not irreconcilable (cf. Bright, p. 18). There are churches dedicated
to SS. Germanus and Lupus in Wales and Cornwall. Both had
been trained in the school of Lérins, a monastery in the group of
islands off the coast at Cannes.</note> to go into Britain to confirm the people's faith
in the grace of God. With ready zeal they complied with
the request and commands of the Holy Church, and put
to sea. The ship sped safely with favouring winds till
they were halfway between the coast of Gaul and Britain.
There on a sudden they were obstructed by the malevolence
of demons, who were jealous that men of such
eminence and piety should be sent to bring back the
people to salvation. They raised storms, and darkened
the sky with clouds. The sails could not support the
fury of the winds, the sailors' skill was forced to give
way, the ship was sustained by prayer, not by strength,
and as it happened, their spiritual leader and bishop,
being spent with weariness, had fallen asleep. Then,
as if because resistance flagged, the tempest gathered
strength, and the ship, overwhelmed by the waves, was
ready to sink. Then the blessed Lupus and all the rest,
greatly troubled, awakened their elder, that he might
oppose the raging elements. He, showing himself the
more resolute in proportion to the greatness of the
danger, called upon Christ, and having, in the name
of the Holy Trinity, taken and sprinkled a little water,
quelled the raging waves, admonished his companion,
encouraged all, and all with one consent uplifted their
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
voices in prayer. Divine help was granted, the enemies
were put to flight, a cloudless calm ensued, the winds
veering about set themselves again to forward their
voyage, the sea was soon traversed, and they reached
the quiet of the wished-for shore. A multitude flocking
thither from all parts, received the bishops, whose
coming had been foretold by the predictions even of
their adversaries. For the evil spirits declared their fear,
and when the bishops expelled them from the bodies of
the possessed, they made known the nature of the
tempest, and the dangers they had occasioned, and confessed
that they had been overcome by the merits and
authority of these men.
</p>

<p>
In the meantime the bishops speedily filled the island
of Britain with the fame of their preaching and miracles;
and the Word of God was by them daily preached, not
only in the churches, but even in the streets and fields,
so that the faithful and Catholic were everywhere confirmed,
and those who had been perverted accepted the
way of amendment. Like the Apostles, they acquired
honour and authority through a good conscience, learning
through the study of letters, and the power of working
miracles through their merits. Thus the whole
country readily came over to their way of thinking; the
authors of the erroneous belief kept themselves in hiding,
and, like evil spirits, grieved for the loss of the people
that were rescued from them. At length, after long
deliberation, they had the boldness to enter the lists.<note place='foot'>This conference is said to have been held at Verulam.</note>
They came forward in all the splendour of their wealth,
with gorgeous apparel, and supported by a numerous
following; choosing rather to hazard the contest, than
to undergo among the people whom they had led astray,
the reproach of having been silenced, lest they should
seem by saying nothing to condemn themselves. An
immense multitude had been attracted thither with their
wives and children. The people were present as spectators
and judges; the two parties stood there in very different
case; on the one side was Divine faith, on the other
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
human presumption; on the one side piety, on the other
pride; on the one side Pelagius, the founder of their
faith, on the other Christ. The blessed bishops permitted
their adversaries to speak first, and their empty speech
long took up the time and filled the ears with meaningless
words. Then the venerable prelates poured forth
the torrent of their eloquence and showered upon them
the words of Apostles and Evangelists, mingling the
Scriptures with their own discourse and supporting their
strongest assertions by the testimony of the written
Word. Vainglory was vanquished and unbelief refuted;
and the heretics, at every argument put before them, not
being able to reply, confessed their errors. The people,
giving judgement, could scarce refrain from violence,
and signified their verdict by their acclamations.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_XVIII'/>
<head>Chap. XVIII. How the some holy man gave sight to the
blind daughter of a tribune, and then coming to St.
Alban, there received of his relics, and left other relics
of the blessed Apostles and other martyrs. [429 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
After this, a certain man, who held the office of tribune,
came forward with his wife, and brought his blind
daughter, a child of ten years of age, to be healed of the
bishops. They ordered her to be brought to their adversaries,
who, being rebuked by their own conscience,
joined their entreaties to those of the child's parents, and
besought the bishops that she might be healed. They,
therefore, perceiving their adversaries to yield, poured
forth a short prayer, and then Germanus, full of the
Holy Ghost, invoking the Trinity, at once drew from his
side a casket which hung about his neck, containing
relics of the saints, and, taking it in his hands, applied
it in the sight of all to the girl's eyes, which were immediately
delivered from darkness and filled with the
light of truth. The parents rejoiced, and the people were
filled with awe at the miracle; and after that day, the
heretical beliefs were so fully obliterated from the minds
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
of all, that they thirsted for and sought after the doctrine
of the bishops.
</p>

<p>
This damnable heresy being thus suppressed, and the
authors thereof confuted, and all the people settled in
the purity of the faith, the bishops went to the tomb of
the martyr, the blessed Alban, to give thanks to God
through him. There Germanus, having with him relics of
all the Apostles, and of divers martyrs, after offering up
his prayers, commanded the tomb to be opened, that he
might lay therein the precious gifts; judging it fitting,
that the limbs of saints brought together from divers
countries, as their equal merits had procured them admission
into heaven, should find shelter in one tomb.
These being honourably bestowed, and laid together, he
took up a handful of dust from the place where the
blessed martyr's blood had been shed, to carry away
with him. In this dust the blood had been preserved,
showing that the slaughter of the martyrs was red, though
the persecutor was pale in death.<note place='foot'>Bede's authority, Constantius, shows here the first trace of any
acquaintance of early historians with the story of St. Alban. The
last sentence is somewhat obscure. Probably the idea is that the
blood of the martyrs continues to cry aloud for vengeance.</note> In consequence of
these things, an innumerable multitude of people was
that day converted to the Lord.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. XIX. How the same holy man, being detained
there by sickness, by his prayers quenched a fire that had
broken out among the houses, and was himself cured of
his infirmity by a vision. [429 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
As they were returning thence, the treacherous enemy,
having, as it chanced, prepared a snare, caused Germanus
to bruise his foot by a fall, not knowing that, as it was
with the blessed Job, his merits would be but increased
by bodily affliction. Whilst he was thus detained some
time in the same place by his infirmity, a fire broke out
in a cottage neighbouring to that in which he was; and
having burned down the other houses which were thatched
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
with reed, fanned by the wind, was carried on to the
dwelling in which he lay. The people all flocked to the
prelate, entreating that they might lift him in their arms,
and save him from the impending danger. But he rebuked
them, and in the assurance of his faith, would
not suffer himself to be removed. The whole multitude,
in terror and despair, ran to oppose the conflagration;
but, for the greater manifestation of the Divine power,
whatsoever the crowd endeavoured to save, was destroyed;
and what the sick and helpless man defended,
the flame avoided and passed by, though the house that
sheltered the holy man lay open to it,<note place='foot'>Reading <q>reserato.</q> The reading <q>reservato</q> is perhaps
easier and has some MS. authority.</note> and while the fire
raged on every side, the place in which he lay appeared
untouched, amid the general conflagration. The multitude
rejoiced at the miracle, and was gladly vanquished
by the power of God. A great crowd of people watched
day and night before the humble cottage; some to have
their souls healed, and some their bodies. All that
Christ wrought in the person of his servant, all the
wonders the sick man performed cannot be told. Moreover,
he would suffer no medicines to be applied to his
infirmity; but one night he saw one clad in garments as
white as snow, standing by him, who reaching out his
hand, seemed to raise him up, and ordered him to stand
firm upon his feet; from which time his pain ceased, and
he was so perfectly restored, that when the day came,
with good courage he set forth upon his journey.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. XX. How the same Bishops brought help from
Heaven to the Britons in a battle, and then returned
home. [430 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the meantime, the Saxons and Picts, with their united
forces, made war upon the Britons, who in these straits
were compelled to take up arms. In their terror thinking
themselves unequal to their enemies, they implored the
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
assistance of the holy bishops; who, hastening to them
as they had promised, inspired so much confidence into
these fearful people, that one would have thought they
had been joined by a mighty army. Thus, by these apostolic
leaders, Christ Himself commanded in their camp.
The holy days of Lent were also at hand, and were
rendered more sacred by the presence of the bishops, insomuch
that the people being instructed by daily sermons,
came together eagerly to receive the grace of baptism.
For a great multitude of the army desired admission to
the saving waters, and a wattled church was constructed
for the Feast of the Resurrection of our Lord, and so
fitted up for the army in the field as if it were in a city.
Still wet with the baptismal water the troops set forth;
the faith of the people was fired; and where arms had
been deemed of no avail, they looked to the help of God.
News reached the enemy of the manner and method of
their purification,<note place='foot'>Reading <q>castitatis,</q> from which it is difficult to extract any
meaning. The above strains the Latin unduly. Constantius has
<q>castrorum,</q> which gives a better sense.</note> who, assured of success, as if they
had to deal with an unarmed host, hastened forward
with renewed eagerness. But their approach was made
known by scouts. When, after the celebration of Easter,
the greater part of the army, fresh from the font, began
to take up arms and prepare for war, Germanus offered
to be their leader. He picked out the most active, explored
the country round about, and observed, in the
way by which the enemy was expected, a valley encompassed
by hills<note place='foot'>Maes-y-Garmon (<q>The Field of Germanus</q>), near Mold, in
Flintshire, has been fixed upon as the scene of the Hallelujah
Victory, and the river in which the army was baptized is said to be
the Alyn (Ussher, <q>Antiqq.</q>). The story is generally regarded
as legendary.</note> of moderate height. In that place he
drew up his untried troops, himself acting as their
general. And now a formidable host of foes drew near,
visible, as they approached, to his men lying in ambush.
Then, on a sudden, Germanus, bearing the standard,
exhorted his men, and bade them all in a loud voice repeat
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
his words. As the enemy advanced in all security,
thinking to take them by surprise, the bishops three
times cried, <q>Hallelujah.</q> A universal shout of the
same word followed, and the echoes from the surrounding
hills gave back the cry on all sides, the enemy was
panic-stricken, fearing, not only the neighbouring rocks,
but even the very frame of heaven above them; and such
was their terror, that their feet were not swift enough to
save them. They fled in disorder, casting away their
arms, and well satisfied if, even with unprotected bodies,
they could escape the danger; many of them, flying headlong
in their fear, were engulfed by the river which they
had crossed. The Britons, without a blow, inactive
spectators of the victory they had gained, beheld their
vengeance complete. The scattered spoils were gathered
up, and the devout soldiers rejoiced in the success which
Heaven had granted them. The prelates thus triumphed
over the enemy without bloodshed, and gained a victory
by faith, without the aid of human force. Thus, having
settled the affairs of the island, and restored tranquillity
by the defeat of the invisible foes, as well as of enemies
in the flesh, they prepared to return home. Their own
merits, and the intercession of the blessed martyr Alban,
obtained for them a calm passage, and the happy vessel
restored them in peace to the desires of their people.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. XXI. How, when the Pelagian heresy began to
spring up afresh, Germanus, returning to Britain with
Severus, first restored bodily strength to a lame youth,
then spiritual health to the people of God, having condemned
or converted the Heretics. [447 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Not long after, news was brought from the same island,
that certain persons were again attempting to teach and
spread abroad the Pelagian heresy, and again the holy
Germanus was entreated by all the priests, that he would
defend the cause of God, which he had before maintained.
He speedily complied with their request; and taking
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
with him Severus,<note place='foot'>Thirteenth bishop of Trèves. This account sums up nearly all
that is known of him.</note> a man of singular sanctity, who was
disciple to the blessed father, Lupus, bishop of Troyes,
and at that time, having been ordained bishop of the
Treveri, was preaching the Word of God to the tribes of
Upper Germany, put to sea, and with favouring winds
and calm waters sailed to Britain.<note place='foot'>This second voyage of St. Germanus is supposed to have taken
place about eighteen years after the first, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, in 447.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the meantime, the evil spirits, speeding through the
whole island, were constrained against their will to foretell
that Germanus was coming, insomuch, that one
Elafius, a chief of that region, without tidings from any
visible messenger, hastened to meet the holy men, carrying
with him his son, who in the very flower of his youth
laboured under a grievous infirmity; for the sinews of
the knee were wasted and shrunk, so that the withered
limb was denied the power to walk. All the country
followed this Elafius. The bishops arrived, and were
met by the ignorant multitude, whom they blessed, and
preached the Word of God to them. They found the
people constant in the faith as they had left them; and
learning that but few had gone astray, they sought out
the authors of the evil and condemned them. Then
suddenly Elafius cast himself at the feet of the bishops,
presenting his son, whose distress was visible and needed
no words to express it. All were grieved, but especially
the bishops, who, filled with pity, invoked the mercy of
God; and straightway the blessed Germanus, causing
the youth to sit down, touched the bent and feeble knee
and passed his healing hand over all the diseased part.
At once health was restored by the power of his touch,
the withered limb regained its vigour, the sinews resumed
their task, and the youth was, in the presence of all the
people, delivered whole to his father. The multitude was
amazed at the miracle, and the Catholic faith was firmly
established in the hearts of all; after which, they were,
in a sermon, exhorted to amend their error. By the judgement
of all, the exponents of the heresy, who had been
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
banished from the island, were brought before the bishops,
to be conveyed into the continent, that the country might
be rid of them, and they corrected of their errors. So it
came to pass that the faith in those parts continued long
after pure and untainted. Thus when they had settled
all things, the blessed prelates returned home as prosperously
as they had come.
</p>

<p>
But Germanus, after this, went to Ravenna to intercede
for the tranquillity of the Armoricans,<note place='foot'>The Armoricans had revolted, and Aetius (<hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XIII'>13</ref> and note)
had enlisted the services of the Alani against them. Germanus,
who had at one time been duke of the Armoricans, went to the
Imperial Court at Ravenna to intercede for them.</note> where, after being
very honourably received by Valentinian and his mother,
Placidia, he departed hence to Christ; his body was conveyed
to his own city with a splendid retinue, and mighty
works attended his passage to the grave. Not long after,
Valentinian was murdered by the followers of Aetius, the
patrician, whom he had put to death, in the sixth<note place='foot'>Really the fifth (16th March, 455 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>). Romulus Augustulus
is usually regarded as the last emperor of the west. He was overthrown
in 476 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> year
of the reign of Marcian, and with him ended the empire
of the West.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. XXII. How the Britons, being for a time at rest
from foreign invasions, wore themselves out by civil wars,
and at the same time gave themselves up to more heinous
crimes.</head>

<p>
In the meantime, in Britain, there was some respite from
foreign, but not from civil war. The cities destroyed by
the enemy and abandoned remained in ruins; and the
natives, who had escaped the enemy, now fought against
each other. Nevertheless, the kings, priests, private men,
and the nobility, still remembering the late calamities
and slaughters, in some measure kept within bounds;
but when these died, and another generation succeeded,
which knew nothing of those times, and was only acquainted
with the existing peaceable state of things, all
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
the bonds of truth and justice were so entirely broken,
that there was not only no trace of them remaining, but
only very few persons seemed to retain any memory of
them at all. To other crimes beyond description, which
their own historian, Gildas,<note place='foot'>The British historian, author of the <q>De Excidio Liber Querulus,</q>
so called from the historian's denunciations of the sins of the
Britons. He himself tells us that he was born in the year of the
battle of Badon Hill (Mons Badonicus), and that he wrote his
History forty-four years after that date. According to Bede (cf.
c. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XV'>15</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi>, and c. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XVI'>16</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>) this would place his birth
approximately in the year 493, but see note on c. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XVI'>16</ref>.</note> mournfully relates, they
added this&mdash;that they never preached the faith to the
Saxons, or English, who dwelt amongst them. Nevertheless,
the goodness of God did not forsake his people,
whom he foreknew, but sent to the aforesaid nation much
more worthy heralds of the truth, to bring it to the faith.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_XXIII'/>
<head>Chap. XXIII. How the holy Pope Gregory sent Augustine,
with other monks, to preach to the English nation,
and encouraged them by a letter of exhortation, not to
desist from their labour. [596 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 582, Maurice, the fifty-fourth
from Augustus, ascended the throne, and reigned twenty-one
years. In the tenth year of his reign, Gregory,<note place='foot'>Gregory the Great. Cf. <ref target='Preface'>Preface</ref>. Bede places the date of his
accession a year too late as well as that of his death (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi>, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_I'>II, 1</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad
init.</hi>, but in the same chapter he rightly places his death in the
second year of Phocas, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, 604).</note> a
man eminent in learning and the conduct of affairs, was
promoted to the Apostolic see of Rome, and presided
over it thirteen years, six months and ten days. He,
being moved by Divine inspiration, in the fourteenth
year of the same emperor, and about the one hundred
and fiftieth after the coming of the English into Britain,
sent the servant of God, Augustine,<note place='foot'>Augustine was prior of St. Gregory's Monastery dedicated to
St. Andrew in Rome.</note> and with him divers
other monks, who feared the Lord, to preach the Word
of God to the English nation. They having, in obedience
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
to the pope's commands, undertaken that work, when
they had gone but a little way on their journey, were
seized with craven terror, and began to think of returning
home, rather than proceed to a barbarous, fierce,
and unbelieving nation, to whose very language they were
strangers; and by common consent they decided that this
was the safer course. At once Augustine, who had been
appointed to be consecrated bishop, if they should be
received by the English, was sent back, that he might, by
humble entreaty, obtain of the blessed Gregory, that
they should not be compelled to undertake so dangerous,
toilsome, and uncertain a journey. The pope, in reply,
sent them a letter of exhortation, persuading them to set
forth to the work of the Divine Word, and rely on the help
of God. The purport of which letter was as follows:
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>Gregory, the servant of the servants of God, to the
servants of our Lord.</hi> Forasmuch as it had been better
not to begin a good work, than to think of desisting from
one which has been begun, it behoves you, my beloved
sons, to fulfil with all diligence the good work, which, by
the help of the Lord, you have undertaken. Let not,
therefore, the toil of the journey, nor the tongues of evil-speaking
men, discourage you; but with all earnestness
and zeal perform, by God's guidance, that which you have
set about; being assured, that great labour is followed
by the greater glory of an eternal reward. When
Augustine, your Superior, returns, whom we also constitute
your abbot, humbly obey him in all things; knowing,
that whatsoever you shall do by his direction, will,
in all respects, be profitable to your souls. Almighty
God protect you with His grace, and grant that I may, in
the heavenly country, see the fruits of your labour, inasmuch
as, though I cannot labour with you, I shall partake
in the joy of the reward, because I am willing to
labour. God keep you in safety, my most beloved sons.
Given the 23rd of July, in the fourteenth year of the reign
of our most religious lord, Mauritius Tiberius Augustus,
the thirteenth year after the consulship of our lord aforesaid,
and the fourteenth indiction.</q><note place='foot'>Cf. IV, 5, p. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>, note.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_XXIV'/>
<head>Chap. XXIV. How he wrote to the bishop of Arles to
entertain them. [596 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
The same venerable pope also sent at the same time
a letter to Aetherius, archbishop of Arles,<note place='foot'>This is a mistake. Aetherius was archbishop of Lyons. Vergilius
was archbishop of Arles. The letter given here, however, is
the letter sent to Aetherius. Similar letters were despatched to
other bishops at this time; among them one to Vergilius of Arles.</note> exhorting him
to give favourable entertainment to Augustine on his way
to Britain; which letter was in these words:
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>To his most reverend and holy brother and fellow
bishop Aetherius, Gregory, the servant of the servants of
God.</hi> Although religious men stand in need of no recommendation
with priests who have the charity which
is pleasing to God; yet because an opportunity of writing
has occurred, we have thought fit to send this letter to
you, Brother, to inform you, that with the help of
God we have directed thither, for the good of souls,
the bearer of these presents, Augustine, the servant of
God, of whose zeal we are assured, with other servants
of God, whom it is requisite that your Holiness readily
assist with priestly zeal, affording him all the comfort
in your power. And to the end that you may be the more
ready in your help, we have enjoined him to inform you
particularly of the occasion of his coming; knowing,
that when you are acquainted with it, you will, as the
matter requires, for the sake of God, dutifully dispose
yourself to give him comfort. We also in all things
recommend to your charity, Candidus,<note place='foot'>A presbyter sent into Gaul by Gregory in 595 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> to administer
the little patrimony of St. Peter in Gaul, to collect its revenues
and to invest them in raiment for the poor, or in English slave lads
to serve in the monasteries and receive a Christian education.</note> the priest, our
common son, whom we have transferred to the administration
of a small patrimony in our Church. God keep
you in safety, most reverend brother. Given the 23rd
day of July, in the fourteenth year of the reign of our
most religious lord, Mauritius Tiberius Augustus, the
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
thirteenth year after the consulship of our lord aforesaid,
and the fourteenth indiction.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_XXV'/>
<head>Chap. XXV. How Augustine, coming into Britain, first
preached in the Isle of Thanet to the King of Kent, and
having obtained licence from him, went into Kent, in
order to preach therein. [597 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Augustine, thus strengthened by the encouragement of
the blessed Father Gregory, returned to the work of the
Word of God, with the servants of Christ who were with
him, and arrived in Britain. The powerful Ethelbert was
at that time king of Kent;<note place='foot'>Ethelbert was the third Bretwalda or dominant king. He had
established a practical hegemony over the East Anglians, the
Mercians of the Trent Valley, the South Saxons, East Saxons,
and even the West Saxons (cf. II, 5, p. <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>).</note> he had extended his dominions
as far as the boundary formed by the great river Humber,
by which the Southern Saxons are divided from the
Northern. On the east of Kent is the large Isle of Thanet,
containing, according to the English way of reckoning,
600 families,<note place='foot'>Families, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, <foreign rend='italic'>hides</foreign>. The hide, probably, was as much land as
would support a family, hence the extent must have varied with
the different conditions in different parts of the country.</note> divided from the mainland by the river
Wantsum,<note place='foot'>In Bede's time Thanet was divided from the rest of Kent by a
broad channel called the Wantsum, now partly represented by the
River Stour.</note> which is about three furlongs in breadth, and
which can be crossed only in two places; for at both ends
it runs into the sea. On this island landed<note place='foot'>The conjecture that they landed at Ebbsfleet, which is also
traditionally regarded as the landing-place of Hengist, has been
generally adopted. Other possible landing-places are Stonar and
Richborough. For a full discussion of the question, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <q>The
Mission of St. Augustine,</q> ed. Rev. A. T. Mason, D.D.</note> the servant
of the Lord, Augustine, and his companions, being, as is
reported, nearly forty men. They had obtained, by order
of the blessed Pope Gregory, interpreters of the nation of
the Franks,<note place='foot'>It has been supposed, on the strength of this passage, that the
speech of the Franks and the English was still mutually intelligible.
This is supported by a statement of Gregory (letter to Theoderic
and Theodebert) that he had desired Augustine to take some
Frankish priests with him. It is assumed that these priests were
the interpreters. On the other hand, in view of the fact that only
fifty years later we find the language of the Franks regarded in
England as a <q>barbara loquella</q> (<ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>III, 7</ref>), it has been inferred that
the interpreters were men who had acquired a knowledge of the
dialect of Kent through commerce or otherwise.</note> and sending to Ethelbert, signified that they
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
were come from Rome, and brought a joyful message,
which most undoubtedly assured to those that hearkened
to it everlasting joys in heaven, and a kingdom that
would never end, with the living and true God. The king
hearing this, gave orders that they should stay in the
island where they had landed, and be furnished with necessaries,
till he should consider what to do with them.
For he had before heard of the Christian religion, having
a Christian wife of the royal family of the Franks, called
Bertha;<note place='foot'>Daughter of Charibert, king of Paris.</note> whom he had received from her parents, upon
condition that she should be permitted to preserve
inviolate the rites of her religion with the Bishop Liudhard,<note place='foot'>Said (on doubtful authority) to have been bishop of Senlis.
He acted as the queen's private chaplain. There is nothing to
show that either he or Bertha attempted to spread their religion in
England, though probably their influence may not have been without
effect on Ethelbert.</note>
who was sent with her to support her in the faith.
Some days after, the king came into the island, and sitting
in the open air, ordered Augustine and his companions
to come and hold a conference with him. For
he had taken precaution that they should not come to
him in any house, lest, by so coming, according to an
ancient superstition, if they practised any magical arts,
they might impose upon him, and so get the better of
him. But they came endued with Divine, not with magic
power, bearing a silver cross for their banner, and the
image of our Lord and Saviour painted on a board; and
chanting litanies, they offered up their prayers to the
Lord for the eternal salvation both of themselves and of
those to whom and for whom they had come. When
they had sat down, in obedience to the king's commands,
and preached to him and his attendants there present
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
the Word of life, the king answered thus: <q>Your words
and promises are fair, but because they are new to us,
and of uncertain import, I cannot consent to them so far
as to forsake that which I have so long observed with
the whole English nation. But because you are come from
far as strangers into my kingdom, and, as I conceive,
are desirous to impart to us those things which you
believe to be true, and most beneficial, we desire not to
harm you, but will give you favourable entertainment,
and take care to supply you with all things necessary to
your sustenance; nor do we forbid you to preach and
gain as many as you can to your religion.</q> Accordingly
he gave them an abode in the city of Canterbury,<note place='foot'>The old Roman town of Doruvernis, which is the name Bede
gives to it throughout the History.</note> which
was the metropolis of all his dominions, and, as he had
promised, besides supplying them with sustenance, did
not refuse them liberty to preach. It is told that, as they
drew near to the city, after their manner, with the holy
cross, and the image of our sovereign Lord and King,
Jesus Christ, they sang in concert this litany: <q>We beseech
thee, O Lord, for Thy great mercy, that Thy wrath
and anger be turned away from this city, and from Thy
holy house, for we have sinned. Hallelujah.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. XXVI. How St. Augustine in Kent followed the
doctrine and manner of life of the primitive Church,
and settled his episcopal see in the royal city. [597 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
As soon as they entered the dwelling-place assigned to
them, they began to imitate the Apostolic manner of life
in the primitive Church; applying themselves to constant
prayer, watchings, and fastings; preaching the Word of
life to as many as they could; despising all worldly
things, as in nowise concerning them; receiving only
their necessary food from those they taught; living themselves
in all respects conformably to what they taught,
and being always ready to suffer any adversity, and even
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
to die for that truth which they preached. In brief, some
believed and were baptized, admiring the simplicity of
their blameless life, and the sweetness of their heavenly
doctrine. There was on the east side of the city, a church
dedicated of old to the honour of St. Martin,<note place='foot'>St. Martin was regarded with special reverence in Britain and
Ireland. Possibly some of the earliest missionaries may have been
his disciples, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, St. Ninian and St. Patrick. The Roman church
of St. Martin at Canterbury has been frequently altered and partly
rebuilt, so that <q>small portions only of the Roman walls remain.
Roman bricks are used as old materials in the parts rebuilt</q>
(Parker).</note> built whilst
the Romans were still in the island, wherein the queen,
who, as has been said before, was a Christian, was wont
to pray. In this they also first began to come together,
to chant the Psalms, to pray, to celebrate Mass, to
preach, and to baptize, till when the king had been converted
to the faith, they obtained greater liberty to preach
everywhere and build or repair churches.
</p>

<p>
When he, among the rest, believed and was baptized,
attracted by the pure life of these holy men and their
gracious promises, the truth of which they established
by many miracles, greater numbers began daily to flock
together to hear the Word, and, forsaking their heathen
rites, to have fellowship, through faith, in the unity of
Christ's Holy Church. It is told that the king, while he
rejoiced at their conversion and their faith, yet compelled
none to embrace Christianity, but only showed more
affection to the believers, as to his fellow citizens in the
kingdom of Heaven. For he had learned from those who
had instructed him and guided him to salvation, that the
service of Christ ought to be voluntary, not by compulsion.
Nor was it long before he gave his teachers a
settled residence suited to their degree in his metropolis
of Canterbury, with such possessions of divers sorts as
were necessary for them.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_XXVII'/>
<head>Chap. XXVII. How St. Augustine, being made a
bishop, sent to acquaint Pope Gregory with what had
been done in Britain, and asked and received replies,
of which he stood in need. [597-601 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the meantime, Augustine, the man of God, went to
Arles, and, according to the orders received from the
holy Father Gregory, was ordained archbishop of the
English nation,<note place='foot'>Augustine was not consecrated as archbishop either of London
or Canterbury, but by the general title of <q>Archbishop of the
English.</q> According to Gregory's original scheme, London, not
Canterbury, was to have been the seat of the primacy of southern
England (cf. c. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXIX'>29</ref>), London and York being doubtless the most
important cities of south and north known to him from their
history during the Roman occupation. But Christianity was not
permanently established in London till it was too late to remove
the see from Canterbury, which would obviously commend itself to
Augustine as the most suitable place to be the metropolitan city.</note> by Aetherius,<note place='foot'>For Aetherius read Vergilius (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>, note). <q>The occupant
of the see of Arles was in some sense primate of France at this
time, and, as such, Vergilius received the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pallium</foreign> and the papal
vice-gerentship in the kingdom of Childebert</q> (Dict. Christ.
Biog.).</note> archbishop of that city.
Then returning into Britain, he sent Laurentius the
the priest<note place='foot'>He succeeded Augustine as archbishop. For his history, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> II,
<ref target='Book_II_Chap_VI'>6</ref>, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_VII'>7</ref>.</note> and Peter the monk<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXXIII'>33</ref>.</note> to Rome, to acquaint
Pope Gregory, that the English nation had received the
faith of Christ, and that he was himself made their bishop.
At the same time, he desired his solution of some doubts
which seemed urgent to him. He soon received fitting
answers to his questions, which we have also thought
meet to insert in this our history:
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The First Question of the blessed Augustine, Bishop of
the Church of Canterbury.</hi>&mdash;Concerning bishops, what
should be their manner of conversation towards their
clergy? or into how many portions the offerings of the
faithful at the altar are to be divided? and how the
bishop is to act in the Church?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gregory, Pope of the City of Rome, answers.</hi>&mdash;Holy
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
Scripture, in which we doubt not you are well versed,
testifies to this, and in particular the Epistles of the
Blessed Paul to Timothy, wherein he endeavours to show
him what should be his manner of conversation in the
house of God; but it is the custom of the Apostolic see to
prescribe these rules to bishops when they are ordained:
that all emoluments which accrue, are to be divided into
four portions;&mdash;one for the bishop and his household, for
hospitality and entertainment of guests; another for the
clergy; a third for the poor; and the fourth for the repair
of churches. But in that you, my brother, having been
instructed in monastic rules, must not live apart from
your clergy in the Church of the English, which has been
lately, by the will of God, converted to the faith, you
must establish the manner of conversation of our fathers
in the primitive Church, among whom, none said that
aught of the things which they possessed was his own,
but they had all things common.
</p>

<p>
But if there are any clerks not received into holy orders,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, those in minor orders; all below the subdiaconate.</note>
who cannot live continent, they are to take wives, and
receive their stipends outside of the community; because
we know that it is written concerning the same fathers
of whom we have spoken that a distribution was made
unto every man according as he had need. Care is also
to be taken of their stipends, and provision to be made,
and they are to be kept under ecclesiastical rule, that
they may live orderly, and attend to singing of psalms,
and, by the help of God, preserve their hearts and
tongues and bodies from all that is unlawful. But as for
those that live in common, there is no need to say anything
of assigning portions, or dispensing hospitality and
showing mercy; inasmuch as all that they have over is to
be spent in pious and religious works, according to the
teaching of Him who is the Lord and Master of all,
<q>Give alms of such things as ye have over, and behold
all things are clean unto you.</q><note place='foot'>St. Luke, xi, 41. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quod superest</foreign> (Vulgate) = πλήν (R.V.,<q>Howbeit</q>;
A.V., <q>But rather</q>), adverbial. Gregory takes it to mean
<q>what is over.</q></note>
</p>

<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Augustine's Second Question.</hi>&mdash;Whereas the faith is one
and the same, are there different customs in different
Churches? and is one custom of Masses observed in the
holy Roman Church, and another in the Church of Gaul?<note place='foot'>Augustine must have observed these differences of ritual as he
travelled through Gaul. Presumably also he found the Gallic use
adopted at St. Martin's, Canterbury, by Liudhard. Dr. Bright summarizes
these differences, <q>Early English Church History,</q> p. 64.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Pope Gregory answers.</hi>&mdash;You know, my brother, the
custom of the Roman Church in which you remember
that you were bred up. But my will is, that if you have
found anything, either in the Roman, or the Gallican, or
any other Church, which may be more acceptable to
Almighty God, you should carefully make choice of the
same, and sedulously teach the Church of the English,
which as yet is new in the faith, whatsoever you can
gather from the several Churches. For things are not to
be loved for the sake of places, but places for the sake of
good things. Choose, therefore, from every Church those
things that are pious, religious, and right, and when you
have, as it were, made them up into one bundle, let the
minds of the English be accustomed thereto.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Augustine's Third Question.</hi>&mdash;I beseech you, what
punishment must be inflicted on one who steals anything
from a church?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gregory answers.</hi>&mdash;You may judge, my brother, by the
condition of the thief, in what manner he is to be corrected.
For there are some, who, having substance,
commit theft; and there are others, who transgress in
this matter through want. Wherefore it is requisite,
that some be punished with fines, others with stripes;
some with more severity, and some more mildly. And
when the severity is greater, it is to proceed from charity,
not from anger; because this is done for the sake of him
who is corrected, that he may not be delivered up to the
fires of Hell. For it behoves us to maintain discipline
among the faithful, as good parents do with their children
according to the flesh, whom they punish with stripes
for their faults, and yet they design to make those whom
they chastise their heirs, and preserve their possessions
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
for those whom they seem to visit in wrath. This charity
is, therefore, to be kept in mind, and it dictates the
measure of the punishment, so that the mind may do
nothing beyond the rule prescribed by reason. You will
add to this, how men are to restore those things which
they have stolen from the church. But let not the Church
take more than it has lost of its worldly possessions, or
seek gain from vanities.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Augustine's Fourth Question.</hi>&mdash;Whether two full
brothers may marry two sisters, who are of a family far
removed from them?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gregory answers.</hi>&mdash;Most assuredly this may lawfully be
done; for nothing is found in Holy Writ on this matter
that seems to contradict it.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Augustine's Fifth Question.</hi>&mdash;To what degree may the
faithful marry with their kindred? and is it lawful to
marry a stepmother or a brother's wife?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gregory answers.</hi>&mdash;A certain secular law in the Roman
commonwealth allows, that the son and daughter of a
brother and sister,<note place='foot'>Reading <q>fratris et sororis</q> (for <q>frater et soror</q>), as the
sense requires, but there is no MS. authority for the change.</note> or of two full brothers, or two sisters,
may be joined in matrimony; but we have found, by experience,
that the offspring of such wedlock cannot grow
up; and the Divine law forbids a man to <q>uncover the
nakedness of his kindred.</q> Hence of necessity it must
be the third or fourth generation of the faithful, that can
be lawfully joined in matrimony; for the second, which
we have mentioned, must altogether abstain from one
another. To marry with one's stepmother is a heinous
crime, because it is written in the Law, <q>Thou shalt not
uncover the nakedness of thy father:</q> now the son, indeed,
cannot uncover his father's nakedness; but in
regard that it is written, <q>They twain shall be one flesh,</q>
he that presumes to uncover the nakedness of his stepmother,
who was one flesh with his father, certainly uncovers
the nakedness of his father. It is also prohibited
to marry with a sister-in-law, because by the former
union she is become the brother's flesh. For which thing
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
also John the Baptist was beheaded, and obtained the
crown of holy martyrdom. For, though he was not
ordered to deny Christ, and it was not for confessing
Christ that he was killed, yet inasmuch as the same
Jesus Christ, our Lord, said, <q>I am the Truth,</q> because
John was killed for the truth, he also shed his blood for
Christ.
</p>

<p>
But forasmuch as there are many of the English, who,
whilst they were still heathens, are said to have been
joined in this unholy union, when they attain to the faith
they are to be admonished to abstain, and be made to
know that this is a grievous sin. Let them fear the dread
judgement of God, lest, for the gratification of their carnal
desires, they incur the torments of eternal punishment.
Yet they are not on this account to be deprived of the
Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, lest they
should seem to be punished for those things which they
did through ignorance before they had received Baptism.
For in these times the Holy Church chastises some things
with zeal, and tolerates some in mercy, and is blind to
some in her wisdom, and so, by forbearance and blindness
often suppresses the evil that stands in her way. But all
that come to the faith are to be admonished not to presume
to do such things. And if any shall be guilty of
them, they are to be excluded from the Communion of the
Body and Blood of Christ. For as the offence is, in some
measure, to be tolerated in those who did it through
ignorance, so it is to be rigorously punished in those
who do not fear to sin knowingly.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Augustine's Sixth Question.</hi>&mdash;Whether a bishop may
be consecrated without other bishops being present, if
there be so great a distance between them, that they
cannot easily come together?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gregory answers.</hi>&mdash;In the Church of England, of which
you are as yet the only bishop, you cannot otherwise
ordain a bishop than in the absence of other bishops.
For when do bishops come over from Gaul, that they
may be present as witnesses to you in ordaining a bishop?
But we would have you, my brother, to ordain bishops
in such a manner, that the said bishops may not be far
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
asunder, to the end that there be no lack, but that at the
ordination of a bishop other pastors also, whose presence
is of great benefit, should easily come together.<note place='foot'>The text of this passage is corrupt, but no very satisfactory
emendations have been suggested.</note>
Thus, when, by the help of God, bishops shall have been
ordained in places near to one another, no ordination of
a bishop is to take place without assembling three or four
bishops. For, even in spiritual affairs, we may take
example by the temporal, that they may be wisely and
discreetly conducted. For surely, when marriages are
celebrated in the world, some married persons are assembled,
that those who went before in the way of
matrimony, may also partake in the joy of the new union.
Why, then, at this spiritual ordinance, wherein, by means
of the sacred ministry, man is joined to God, should not
such persons be assembled, as may either rejoice in the
advancement of the new bishop, or jointly pour forth
their prayers to Almighty God for his preservation?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Augustine's Seventh Question.</hi>&mdash;How are we to deal
with the bishops of Gaul and Britain?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gregory answers.</hi>&mdash;We give you no authority over the
bishops of Gaul, because the bishop of Arles received
the pall<note place='foot'>The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pallium</foreign> is a long strip of fine cloth ornamented with
crosses. It is made from wool of lambs reared in the convent of
St. Agnes at Rome, and is laid for a night on the tomb of St. Peter.
It is worn passing over the shoulders, with the ends hanging down
in front and behind, somewhat in the form of the letter Y. (The
form has varied at different times.) In the east it is called <q>omophorion:</q>
the bishops wear it during the celebration of the Eucharist.
It originally formed part of the imperial habit and was granted
by the emperor as a special mark of honour. Afterwards the pope
claimed the exclusive right of bestowing it, and its possession
became restricted to metropolitans, and was considered necessary
for the exercise of their functions.</note> in the old times of my predecessors, and we
must by no means deprive him of the authority he has
received. If it shall therefore happen, my brother, that
you go over into the province of Gaul, you are to concert
with the said bishop of Arles, how, if there be any faults
among the bishops, they may be amended. And if he
shall be lukewarm in keeping up discipline, he is to be
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
fired by your zeal; to whom we have also written, that
aided by the presence of your Holiness in Gaul, he should
exert himself to the utmost, and put away from the
behaviour of the bishops all that is opposed to the
command of our Creator. But you shall not have power
to go beyond your own authority and judge the bishops
of Gaul, but by persuading, and winning them, and
showing good works for them to imitate, you shall recall
the perverted to the pursuit of holiness; for it is written
in the Law, <q>When thou comest into the standing corn
of thy neighbour, then thou mayest bruise the ears with
thine hand and eat; but thou shalt not move a sickle
unto thy neighbours' standing corn.</q><note place='foot'>Deut., xxiii, 25.</note> For thou mayest
not apply the sickle of judgement in that harvest which
thou seest to have been committed to another; but by the
influence of good works thou shalt clear the Lord's wheat
of the chaff of its vices, and convert it by exhortation and
persuasion in the body of the Church, as it were, by eating.
But whatsoever is to be done by authority, must be
transacted with the aforesaid bishop of Arles, lest that
should be omitted, which the ancient institution of the
fathers has appointed.<note place='foot'>The reference may be to the third General Council held at
Ephesus in 431 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, at which the rule was laid down <q>that no
bishop may act in any province which has not always been subject
to him.</q></note> But as for all the bishops of
Britain, we commit them to your care, that the unlearned
may be taught, the weak strengthened by persuasion,
and the perverse corrected by authority.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Augustine's Eighth Question.</hi>&mdash;Whether a woman with
child ought to be baptized? Or when she has brought
forth, after what time she may come into the church?
As also, after how many days the infant born may be
baptized, lest he be prevented by death? Or how long
after her husband may have carnal knowledge of her?
Or whether it is lawful for her to come into the church
when she has her courses, or to receive the Sacrament of
Holy Communion? Or whether a man, under certain
circumstances, may come into the church before he has
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
washed with water? Or approach to receive the Mystery
of the Holy Communion? All which things are requisite
to be known by the ignorant nation of the English.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gregory answers.</hi>&mdash;I do not doubt but that these questions
have been put to you, my brother, and I think I
have already answered you therein. But I believe you
would wish the opinion which you yourself might give
and hold to be confirmed by my reply also. Why should
not a woman with child be baptized, since the fruitfulness
of the flesh is no offence in the eyes of Almighty God?
For when our first parents sinned in Paradise, they forfeited
the immortality which they had received, by the
just judgement of God. Because, therefore, Almighty
God would not for their fault wholly destroy the human
race, he both deprived man of immortality for his sin,
and, at the same time, of his great goodness and loving-kindness,
reserved to him the power of propagating his
race after him. On what ground, then, can that which
is preserved to human nature by the free gift of Almighty
God, be excluded from the privilege of Holy Baptism?
For it is very foolish to imagine that the gift can be
opposed to grace in that Mystery in which all sin is
blotted out. When a woman is delivered, after how
many days she may come into the church, you have
learnt from the teaching of the Old Testament, to wit,
that she is to abstain for a male child thirty-three days,
and sixty-six for a female. Now you must know that
this is to be received in a mystery; for if she enters the
church the very hour that she is delivered, to return thanks,
she is not guilty of any sin; because the pleasure of the
flesh is a fault, and not the pain; but the pleasure is in
the copulation of the flesh, whereas there is pain in bringing
forth the child. Wherefore it is said to the first
mother of all, <q>In sorrow thou shalt bring forth children.</q>
If, therefore, we forbid a woman that has brought
forth, to enter the church, we make a crime of her very
punishment. To baptize either a woman who has brought
forth, if there be danger of death, even the very hour
that she brings forth, or that which she has brought forth
the very hour it is born, is in no way prohibited, because,
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
as the grace of the Holy Mystery is to be with much discretion
provided for those who are in full life and capable
of understanding, so is it to be without any delay administered
to the dying; lest, while a further time is
sought to confer the Mystery of redemption, if a small
delay intervene, the person that is to be redeemed be
dead and gone.
</p>

<p>
Her husband is not to approach her, till the infant
born be weaned. An evil custom is sprung up in the
lives of married people, in that women disdain to suckle
the children whom they bring forth, and give them to
other women to suckle; which seems to have been invented
on no other account but incontinency; because,
as they will not be continent, they will not suckle the
children whom they bear. Those women, therefore, who,
from evil custom, give their children to others to bring
up, must not approach their husbands till the time of
purification is past. For even when there has been no
child-birth, women are forbidden to do so, whilst they
have their courses, insomuch that the Law condemns
to death any man that shall approach unto a woman
during her uncleanness. Yet the woman, nevertheless,
must not be forbidden to come into the church whilst
she has her courses; because the superfluity of nature
cannot be imputed to her as a crime; and it is not
just that she should be refused admittance into the
church, for that which she suffers against her will.
For we know, that the woman who had the issue of
blood, humbly approaching behind our Lord's back,
touched the hem of his garment, and her infirmity immediately
departed from her. If, therefore, she that had
an issue of blood might commendably touch the garment
of our Lord, why may not she, who has her courses,
lawfully enter into the church of God? But you may
say, Her infirmity compelled her, whereas these we
speak of are bound by custom. Consider, then, most
dear brother, that all we suffer in this mortal flesh,
through the infirmity of our nature, is ordained by the
just judgement of God after the fall; for to hunger, to
thirst, to be hot, to be cold, to be weary, is from the
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
infirmity of our nature; and what else is it to seek food
against hunger, drink against thirst, air against heat,
clothes against cold, rest against weariness, than to procure
a remedy against distempers? Thus to a woman
her courses are a distemper. If, therefore, it was a commendable
boldness in her, who in her disease touched
our Lord's garment, why may not that which is allowed
to one infirm person, be granted to all women, who,
through the fault of their nature, are rendered infirm?
</p>

<p>
She must not, therefore, be forbidden to receive the
Mystery of the Holy Communion during those days.
But if any one out of profound respect does not presume
to do it, she is to be commended; yet if she receives it, she
is not to be judged. For it is the part of noble minds in
some manner to acknowledge their faults, even when
there is no fault; because very often that is done without
a fault, which, nevertheless, proceeded from a fault.
Thus, when we are hungry, it is no sin to eat; yet our
being hungry proceeds from the sin of the first man.
The courses are no sin in women, because they happen
naturally; yet, because our nature itself is so depraved,
that it appears to be defiled even without the concurrence
of the will, a defect arises from sin, and thereby
human nature may itself know what it is become by
judgement. And let man, who wilfully committed the
offence, bear the guilt of that offence against his will.
And, therefore, let women consider with themselves, and
if they do not presume, during their courses, to approach
the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord, they
are to be commended for their praiseworthy consideration;
but when they are carried away with love of the
same Mystery to receive it according to the custom of
the religious life, they are not to be restrained, as we
said before. For as in the Old Testament the outward
works are observed, so in the New Testament, that
which is outwardly done, is not so diligently regarded as
that which is inwardly thought, that the punishment may
be with discernment. For whereas the Law forbids the
eating of many things as unclean, yet our Lord says in
the Gospel, <q>Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
a man; but that which cometh out of the mouth,
this defileth a man.</q> And afterwards he added, expounding
the same, <q>Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts.</q>
Where it is abundantly shown, that that is declared by
Almighty God to be polluted in deed, which springs from
the root of a polluted thought. Whence also Paul the
Apostle says, <q>Unto the pure all things are pure, but
unto them that are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is
pure.</q> And presently, declaring the cause of that defilement,
he adds, <q>For even their mind and conscience is
defiled.</q> If, therefore, meat is not unclean to him whose
mind is not unclean, why shall that which a woman
suffers according to nature, with a clean mind, be imputed
to her as uncleanness?
</p>

<p>
A man who has approached his own wife is not to
enter the church unless washed with water, nor is he to
enter immediately although washed. The Law prescribed
to the ancient people, that a man in such cases should
be washed with water, and not enter into the church
before the setting of the sun. Which, nevertheless, may
be understood spiritually, because a man acts so when
the mind is led by the imagination to unlawful concupiscence;
for unless the fire of concupiscence be first
driven from his mind, he is not to think himself worthy
of the congregation of the brethren, while he sees himself
burdened by the iniquity of a perverted will. For
though divers nations have divers opinions concerning
this affair, and seem to observe different rules, it was
always the custom of the Romans, from ancient times,
for such an one to seek to be cleansed by washing,
and for some time reverently to forbear entering the
church. Nor do we, in so saying, assign matrimony to
be a fault; but forasmuch as lawful intercourse cannot
be had without the pleasure of the flesh, it is proper to
forbear entering the holy place, because the pleasure
itself cannot be without a fault. For he was not born of
adultery or fornication, but of lawful marriage, who
said, <q>Behold I was conceived in iniquity, and in sin
my mother brought me forth.</q> For he who knew himself
to have been conceived in iniquity, lamented that he
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
was born from sin, because he bears the defect, as a tree
bears in its bough the sap it drew from the root. In
which words, however, he does not call the union of the
married couple iniquity, but the will itself. For there are
many things which are lawful and permitted, and yet we
are somewhat defiled in doing them. As very often by
being angry we correct faults, and at the same time disturb
our own peace of mind; and though that which we
do is right, yet it is not to be approved that our mind
should be disturbed. For he who said, <q>My eye was
disturbed with anger,</q> had been angry at the vices of
sinners. Now, seeing that only a calm mind can rest
in the light of contemplation, he grieved that his eye was
disturbed with anger; because, whilst he was correcting
evil actions below, he was obliged to be confused and
disturbed with regard to the contemplation of the highest
things. Anger against vice is, therefore, commendable,
and yet painful to a man, because he thinks that by his
mind being agitated, he has incurred some guilt. Lawful
commerce, therefore, must be for the sake of children,
not of pleasure; and must be to procure offspring, not to
satisfy vices. But if any man is led not by the desire of
pleasure, but only for the sake of getting children, such
a man is certainly to be left to his own judgement, either
as to entering the church, or as to receiving the Mystery
of the Body and Blood of our Lord, which he, who being
placed in the fire cannot burn, is not to be forbidden by
us to receive. But when, not the love of getting children,
but of pleasure prevails, the pair have cause to lament
their deed. For this the holy preaching concedes to them,
and yet fills the mind with dread of the very concession.
For when Paul the Apostle said, <q>Let him that cannot
contain have his own wife;</q> he presently took care to
subjoin, <q>But this I say by way of permission, not of
commandment.</q> For that is not granted by way of permission
which is lawful, because it is just; and, therefore,
that which he said he permitted, he showed to be
an offence.
</p>

<p>
It is seriously to be considered, that when God was
about to speak to the people on Mount Sinai, He first
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
commanded them to abstain from women. And if purity
of body was there so carefully required, where God spoke
to the people by the means of a creature as His representative,
that those who were to hear the words of God
should abstain; how much more ought women, who
receive the Body of Almighty God, to preserve themselves
in purity of flesh, lest they be burdened with the very
greatness of that inestimable Mystery? For this reason
also, it was said to David, concerning his men, by the
priest, that if they were clean in this particular, they
should receive the shewbread, which they would not have
received at all, had not David first declared them to be
clean. Then the man, who, afterwards, has been washed
with water, is also capable of receiving the Mystery of
the Holy Communion, when it is lawful for him, according
to what has been before declared, to enter the
church.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Augustine's Ninth Question.</hi>&mdash;Whether after an illusion,
such as is wont to happen in a dream, any man may
receive the Body of our Lord, or if he be a priest, celebrate
the Divine Mysteries?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Gregory answers.</hi>&mdash;The Testament of the Old Law, as
has been said already in the article above, calls such a
man polluted, and allows him not to enter into the church
till the evening, after being washed with water. Which,
nevertheless, a spiritual people, taking in another sense,
will understand in the same manner as above; because
he is imposed upon as it were in a dream, who, being
tempted with uncleanness, is defiled by real representations
in thought, and he is to be washed with water,
that he may cleanse away the sins of thought with tears;
and unless the fire of temptation depart before, may know
himself to be in a manner guilty until the evening. But
a distinction is very necessary in that illusion, and one
must carefully consider what causes it to arise in the
mind of the person sleeping; for sometimes it proceeds
from excess of eating or drinking; sometimes from the
superfluity or infirmity of nature, and sometimes from
the thoughts. And when it happens either through
superfluity or infirmity of nature, such an illusion is not
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
to be feared at all, because it is to be lamented, that
the mind of the person, who knew nothing of it, suffers
the same, rather than that he occasioned it. But when
the appetite of gluttony commits excess in food, and
thereupon the receptacles of the humours are oppressed,
the mind thence contracts some guilt; yet not so much
as to hinder the receiving of the Holy Mystery, or celebrating
Mass, when a holy day requires it, or necessity
obliges the Mystery to be shown forth, because there is
no other priest in the place; for if there be others who
can perform the ministry, the illusion proceeding from
over-eating ought not to exclude a man from receiving the
sacred Mystery; but I am of opinion he ought humbly to
abstain from offering the sacrifice of the Mystery, but
not from receiving it, unless the mind of the person
sleeping has been disturbed with some foul imagination.
For there are some, who for the most part so suffer the
illusion, that their mind, even during the sleep of the
body, is not defiled with filthy thoughts. In which case,
one thing is evident, that the mind is guilty, not being
acquitted even in its own judgement; for though it does
not remember to have seen anything whilst the body was
sleeping, yet it calls to mind that, when the body was
awake, it fell into gluttony. But if the illusion of the sleeper
proceeds from evil thoughts when he was awake, then
its guilt is manifest to the mind; for the man perceives
from what root that defilement sprang, because what he
had consciously thought of, that he afterwards unconsciously
endured. But it is to be considered, whether
that thought was no more than a suggestion, or proceeded
to delight, or, what is worse, consented to sin.
For all sin is committed in three ways, viz., by suggestion,
by delight, and by consent. Suggestion comes
from the Devil, delight from the flesh, and consent from
the spirit. For the serpent suggested the first offence,
and Eve, as flesh, took delight in it, but Adam, as the
spirit, consented. And when the mind sits in judgement
on itself, it must clearly distinguish between suggestion
and delight, and between delight and consent. For when
the evil spirit suggests a sin to the mind, if there ensue
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
no delight in the sin, the sin is in no way committed;
but when the flesh begins to take delight in it, then sin
begins to arise. But if it deliberately consents, then the
sin is known to be full-grown. The seed, therefore, of
sin is in the suggestion, the nourishment of it in delight,
its maturity in the consent. And it often happens that
what the evil spirit sows in the thought, in that the flesh
begins to find delight, and yet the soul does not consent
to that delight. And whereas the flesh cannot be delighted
without the mind, yet the mind struggling against the
pleasures of the flesh, is after a manner unwillingly bound
by the carnal delight, so that through reason it opposes
it, and does not consent, yet being bound by delight, it
grievously laments being so bound. Wherefore that
great soldier of our Lord's host, groaned and said, <q>I
see another law in my members warring against the law
of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of
sin, which is in my members.</q> Now if he was a captive,
he did not fight; but he did fight; wherefore he was a
captive and at the same time therefore fought against the
law of the mind, which the law that is in the members
opposed; but if he fought, he was no captive. Thus,
then, man is, as I may say, a captive and yet free. Free
on account of justice, which he loves, a captive by the
delight which he unwillingly bears within him.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. XXVIII. How Pope Gregory wrote to the bishop
of Arles to help Augustine in the work of God. [601 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Thus far the answers of the holy Pope Gregory, to the
questions of the most reverend prelate, Augustine. Now
the letter, which he says he had written to the bishop of
Arles, was directed to Vergilius, successor to Aetherius,<note place='foot'>This is Bede's attempt to reconcile the discrepancy created by
his mistake in cc. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref> and <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXVII'>27</ref>.</note>
and was in the following words:
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>To his most reverend and holy brother and fellow
bishop, Vergilius; Gregory, servant of the servants of God.</hi>
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
With how much kindness brethren, coming of their own
accord, are to be entertained, is shown by this, that they
are for the most part invited for the sake of brotherly
love. Therefore, if our common brother, Bishop Augustine,
shall happen to come to you, let your love, as is becoming,
receive him with so great kindness and affection,
that it may refresh him by the benefit of its consolation
and show to others how brotherly charity is to be cultivated.
And, since it often happens that those who are
at a distance first learn from others the things that need
correction, if he bring before you, my brother, any sins
of bishops or others, do you, in conjunction with him,
carefully inquire into the same, and show yourself so
strict and earnest with regard to those things which
offend God and provoke His wrath, that for the amendment
of others, the punishment may fall upon the guilty,
and the innocent may not suffer under false report. God
keep you in safety, most reverend brother. Given the
22nd day of June, in the nineteenth year of the reign of
our most religious lord, Mauritius Tiberius Augustus, the
eighteenth year after the consulship of our said lord, and
the fourth indiction.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_XXIX'/>
<head>Chap. XXIX. How the same Pope sent to Augustine
the Pall and a letter, along with several ministers of
the Word. [601 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Moreover, the same Pope Gregory, hearing from Bishop
Augustine, that the harvest which he had was great and
the labourers but few, sent to him, together with his
aforesaid envoys, certain fellow labourers and ministers
of the Word, of whom the chief and foremost were Mellitus,
Justus, Paulinus, and Rufinianus,<note place='foot'>Mellitus was consecrated Bishop of London in 604, and succeeded
Laurentius in the see of Canterbury in 619. Justus was
consecrated Bishop of Rochester in 604, and succeeded Mellitus as
Primate in 624 (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_II_Chap_III'>II, 3</ref>, foll.). Paulinus was the great missionary
bishop of the Northumbrians (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_II_Chap_IX'>II, 9</ref>, foll.). Rufinianus was the
third abbot of St. Augustine's monastery (SS. Peter and Paul).</note> and by them all
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
things in general that were necessary for the worship
and service of the Church, to wit, sacred vessels and
altar-cloths, also church-furniture, and vestments for the
bishops and clerks, as likewise relics of the holy Apostles
and martyrs; besides many manuscripts. He also sent
a letter, wherein he signified that he had despatched the
pall to him, and at the same time directed how he should
constitute bishops in Britain. The letter was in these
words:
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>To his most reverend and holy brother and fellow
bishop, Augustine; Gregory, the servant of the servants of
God.</hi> Though it be certain, that the unspeakable rewards
of the eternal kingdom are reserved for those who labour
for Almighty God, yet it is requisite that we bestow on
them the benefit of honours, to the end that they may by
this recompense be encouraged the more vigorously to
apply themselves to the care of their spiritual work.
And, seeing that the new Church of the English is,
through the bounty of the Lord, and your labours,
brought to the grace of God, we grant you the use of the
pall in the same, only for the celebration of the solemn
service of the Mass; that so you may ordain twelve
bishops in different places, who shall be subject to your
jurisdiction. But the bishop of London shall, for the
future, be always consecrated by his own synod, and
receive the pall, which is the token of his office, from
this holy and Apostolic see, which I, by the grace of
God, now serve. But we would have you send to the
city of York such a bishop as you shall think fit to ordain;
yet so, that if that city, with the places adjoining, shall
receive the Word of God, that bishop shall also ordain
twelve bishops, and enjoy the honour of a metropolitan;
for we design, if we live, by the help of God, to bestow
on him also the pall; and yet we would have him to be
subject to your authority, my brother; but after your
decease, he shall so preside over the bishops he shall have
ordained, as to be in no way subject to the jurisdiction of
the bishop of London. But for the future let there be
this distinction as regards honour between the bishops
of the cities of London and York, that he who has been
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
first ordained have the precedence.<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXVII'>27</ref> <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi>, note. Gregory's symmetrical scheme was
never carried out, and it was not till 735 that York became a
metropolitan see.</note> But let them take
counsel and act in concert and with one mind dispose
whatsoever is to be done for zeal of Christ; let them
judge rightly, and carry out their judgement without
dissension.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But to you, my brother, shall, by the authority of
our God and Lord Jesus Christ, be subject not only
those bishops whom you shall ordain, and those that
shall be ordained by the bishop of York, but also all the
prelates in Britain; to the end that from the words and
manner of life of your Holiness they may learn the rule of
a right belief and a good life, and fulfilling their office in
faith and righteousness, they may, when it shall please
the Lord, attain to the kingdom of Heaven. God preserve
you in safety, most reverend brother.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Given the 22nd of June, in the nineteenth year of the
reign of our most religious lord, Mauritius Tiberius
Augustus, the eighteenth year after the consulship of our
said lord, and the fourth indiction.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. XXX. A copy of the letter which Pope Gregory
sent to the Abbot Mellitus, then going into Britain.
[601 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
The aforesaid envoys having departed, the blessed Father
Gregory sent after them a letter worthy to be recorded,
wherein he plainly shows how carefully he watched over
the salvation of our country. The letter was as follows:
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>To his most beloved son, the Abbot Mellitus; Gregory,
the servant of the servants of God.</hi> We have been much
concerned, since the departure of our people that are
with you, because we have received no account of the
success of your journey. Howbeit, when Almighty God
has led you to the most reverend Bishop Augustine,
our brother, tell him what I have long been considering
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
in my own mind concerning the matter of the English
people; to wit, that the temples of the idols in that
nation ought not to be destroyed; but let the idols that
are in them be destroyed; let water be consecrated and
sprinkled in the said temples, let altars be erected, and
relics placed there. For if those temples are well built, it
is requisite that they be converted from the worship of
devils to the service of the true God; that the nation,
seeing that their temples are not destroyed, may remove
error from their hearts, and knowing and adoring the
true God, may the more freely resort to the places to
which they have been accustomed. And because they are
used to slaughter many oxen in sacrifice to devils, some
solemnity must be given them in exchange for this, as
that on the day of the dedication, or the nativities of the
holy martyrs, whose relics are there deposited, they
should build themselves huts of the boughs of trees
about those churches which have been turned to that use
from being temples, and celebrate the solemnity with
religious feasting, and no more offer animals to the
Devil, but kill cattle and glorify God in their feast, and
return thanks to the Giver of all things for their abundance;
to the end that, whilst some outward gratifications
are retained, they may the more easily consent to the
inward joys. For there is no doubt that it is impossible
to cut off every thing at once from their rude natures;
because he who endeavours to ascend to the highest
place rises by degrees or steps, and not by leaps. Thus
the Lord made Himself known to the people of Israel in
Egypt; and yet He allowed them the use, in His own
worship, of the sacrifices which they were wont to offer
to the Devil, commanding them in His sacrifice to kill
animals, to the end that, with changed hearts, they
might lay aside one part of the sacrifice, whilst they
retained another; and although the animals were the
same as those which they were wont to offer, they should
offer them to the true God, and not to idols; and thus
they would no longer be the same sacrifices. This then,
dearly beloved, it behoves you to communicate to our
aforesaid brother, that he, being placed where he is at
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
present, may consider how he is to order all things.
God preserve you in safety, most beloved son.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Given the 17th of June,<note place='foot'>The date is obviously wrong, as it makes this letter earlier
than that in c. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXIX'>29</ref>. The name of the month is omitted in two of the
oldest MSS. A satisfactory emendation (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Plummer, <hi rend='italic'>ad loc.</hi>) is
<foreign rend='italic'>Augustarum</foreign> (for <foreign rend='italic'>Juliarum</foreign>), the last month in Maurice's reign (XV
Kal. Aug., <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> 18th July).</note> in the nineteenth year of the
reign of our most religious lord, Mauritius Tiberius
Augustus, the eighteenth year after the consulship of
our said lord, and the fourth indiction.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. XXXI. How Pope Gregory, by letter, exhorted
Augustine not to glory in his miracles. [601 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
At which time he also sent Augustine a letter concerning
the miracles that he had heard had been wrought by him;
wherein he admonishes him not to incur the danger of
being puffed up by the number of them. The letter was
in these words:
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I know, dearly beloved brother, that Almighty God,
by means of you, shows forth great miracles to the
nation which it was His will to choose. Wherefore you
must needs rejoice with fear, and fear with joy concerning
that heavenly gift; for you will rejoice because the
souls of the English are by outward miracles drawn to
inward grace; but you will fear, lest, amidst the wonders
that are wrought, the weak mind may be puffed up with
self-esteem, and that whereby it is outwardly raised to
honour cause it inwardly to fall through vain-glory.
For we must call to mind, that when the disciples returned
with joy from preaching, and said to their Heavenly
Master, <q>Lord, even the devils are subject to us through
Thy Name;</q> forthwith they received the reply, <q>In this
rejoice not; but rather rejoice, because your names
are written in heaven.</q><note place='foot'>St. Luke, x, 17-20.</note> For their minds were set on
private and temporal joys, when they rejoiced in miracles;
but they are recalled from the private to the common
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
joy, and from the temporal to the eternal, when it is said
to them, <q>Rejoice in this, because your names are written
in heaven.</q> For all the elect do not work miracles,
and yet the names of all are written in heaven. For those
who are disciples of the truth ought not to rejoice, save
for that good thing which all men enjoy as well as they,
and in which their joy shall be without end.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It remains, therefore, most dear brother, that amidst
those outward actions, which you perform through the
power of the Lord, you should always carefully judge
yourself in your heart, and carefully understand both
what you are yourself, and how much grace is bestowed
upon that same nation, for the conversion of which you
have received even the gift of working miracles. And if
you remember that you have at any time sinned against
our Creator, either by word or deed, always call it to
mind, to the end that the remembrance of your guilt may
crush the vanity which rises in your heart. And whatsoever
gift of working miracles you either shall receive, or
have received, consider the same, not as conferred on you,
but on those for whose salvation it has been given you.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. XXXII. How Pope Gregory sent letters and gifts
to King Ethelbert. [601 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
The same blessed Pope Gregory, at the same time, sent
a letter to King Ethelbert, with many gifts of divers
sorts; being desirous to glorify the king with temporal
honours, at the same time that he rejoiced that through
his own labour and zeal he had attained to the knowledge
of heavenly glory. The copy of the said letter is as
follows:
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>To the most glorious lord, and his most excellent son,
Ethelbert, king of the English, Bishop Gregory.</hi> Almighty
God advances good men to the government of nations,
that He may by their means bestow the gifts of His loving-kindness
on those over whom they are placed. This we
know to have come to pass in the English nation, over
whom your Highness was placed, to the end, that by
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
means of the blessings which are granted to you, heavenly
benefits might also be conferred on your subjects. Therefore,
my illustrious son, do you carefully guard the grace
which you have received from the Divine goodness, and
be eager to spread the Christian faith among the people
under your rule; in all uprightness increase your zeal
for their conversion; suppress the worship of idols;
overthrow the structures of the temples; establish the
manners of your subjects by much cleanness of life, exhorting,
terrifying, winning, correcting, and showing
forth an example of good works, that you may obtain
your reward in Heaven from Him, Whose Name and the
knowledge of Whom you have spread abroad upon earth.
For He, Whose honour you seek and maintain among
the nations, will also render your Majesty's name more
glorious even to posterity.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>For even so the most pious emperor, Constantine, of
old, recovering the Roman commonwealth from the false
worship of idols, brought it with himself into subjection to
Almighty God, our Lord Jesus Christ, and turned to Him
with his whole mind, together with the nations under his
rule. Whence it followed, that his praises transcended
the fame of former princes; and he excelled his predecessors
in renown as much as in good works. Now,
therefore, let your Highness hasten to impart to the
kings and peoples that are subject to you, the knowledge
of one God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; that you may
surpass the ancient kings of your nation in praise and
merit, and while you cause the sins of others among
your own subjects to be blotted out, become the more
free from anxiety with regard to your own sins before
the dread judgement of Almighty God.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Willingly hear, devoutly perform, and studiously
retain in your memory, whatsoever counsel shall be given
you by our most reverend brother, Bishop Augustine,
who is trained up in the monastic rule, full of the knowledge
of Holy Scripture, and, by the help of God, endued
with good works; for if you give ear to him when he
speaks on behalf of Almighty God, the sooner will Almighty
God hear his prayers for you. But if (which God
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
forbid!) you slight his words, how shall Almighty God
hear him on your behalf, when you neglect to hear him
on behalf of God? Unite yourself, therefore, to him with
all your mind, in the fervour of faith, and further his
endeavours, by that virtue which God has given you,
that He may make you partaker of His kingdom, Whose
faith you cause to be received and maintained in your own.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Besides, we would have your Highness know that,
as we find in Holy Scripture from the words of the Almighty
Lord, the end of this present world, and the kingdom
of the saints, which will never come to an end, is at
hand. But as the end of the world draws near, many
things are about to come upon us which were not before,
to wit, changes in the air, and terrors from heaven,
and tempests out of the order of the seasons, wars,
famines, pestilences, earthquakes in divers places;
which things will not, nevertheless, all happen in our
days, but will all follow after our days. If, therefore,
you perceive that any of these things come to pass in
your country, let not your mind be in any way disturbed;
for these signs of the end of the world are sent before,
for this reason, that we may take heed to our souls, and
be watchful for the hour of death, and may be found prepared
with good works to meet our Judge. Thus much,
my illustrious son, I have said in few words, with intent
that when the Christian faith is spread abroad in your
kingdom, our discourse to you may also be more copious,
and we may desire to say the more, as joy for the full
conversion of your nation is increased in our mind.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I have sent you some small gifts, which will not
appear small to you, when received by you with the
blessing of the blessed Apostle, Peter. May Almighty
God, therefore, perfect in you His grace which He has
begun, and prolong your life here through a course of
many years, and in the fulness of time receive you into
the congregation of the heavenly country. May the grace
of God preserve you in safety, my most excellent lord
and son.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Given the 22nd day of June, in the nineteenth year
of the reign of our most religious lord, Mauritius
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
Tiberius Augustus, in the eighteenth year after his consulship,
and the fourth indiction.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_XXXIII'/>
<head>Chap. XXXIII. How Augustine repaired the church of
our Saviour, and built the monastery of the blessed
Peter the Apostle; and concerning Peter the first abbot
of the same.</head>

<p>
Augustine having had his episcopal see granted him in
the royal city, as has been said, recovered therein, with
the support of the king, a church, which he was informed
had been built of old by the faithful among the Romans,
and consecrated it in the name of the Holy Saviour, our
Divine Lord Jesus Christ, and there established a residence
for himself and all his successors.<note place='foot'>The Cathedral: Christchurch, Canterbury; but the original
structure was destroyed by fire about 1067. It was rebuilt by
Lanfranc, and enlarged under his successor, St. Anselm. Prior
Conrad finished and decorated the chancel, and the Church was
dedicated in 1130. The choir was again burnt down in 1174, but
at once rebuilt. It was completed in 1184. A new nave and transept
were built between 1378 and 1410, and the great central tower
was carried up to its present height by the end of the fifteenth
century.</note> He also built a
monastery not far from the city to the eastward, in
which, by his advice, Ethelbert erected from the foundation
the church of the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul,<note place='foot'>Afterwards called St. Augustine's Abbey.</note>
and enriched it with divers gifts; wherein the bodies of
the same Augustine, and of all the bishops of Canterbury,
and of the kings of Kent, might be buried. Nevertheless,
it was not Augustine himself who consecrated
that church, but Laurentius, his successor.
</p>

<p>
The first abbot of that monastery was the priest Peter,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXVII'>27</ref> <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi></note>
who, being sent on a mission into Gaul, was drowned
in a bay of the sea, which is called Amfleat,<note place='foot'>Ambleteuse, a small sea-port, about six miles to the north of
Boulogne.</note> and committed
to a humble tomb by the inhabitants of the place;
but since it was the will of Almighty God to reveal his
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
merits, a light from Heaven was seen over his grave
every night; till the neighbouring people who saw it,
perceiving that he had been a holy man that was buried
there, and inquiring who and whence he was, carried
away the body, and interred it in the church, in the city
of Boulogne, with the honour due to so great a person.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_I_Chap_XXXIV'/>
<head>Chap. XXXIV. How Ethelfrid, king of the Northumbrians,
having vanquished the nations of the Scots, expelled
them from the territories of the English. [603 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
At this time, the brave and ambitious king, Ethelfrid,<note place='foot'>II, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_II'>2</ref>, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XII'>12</ref>; <ref target='Book_III_Chap_I'>III, 1</ref>. He was the grandson of Ida, first king of
Bernicia (V, 24, and note). His father, Ethelric, seized Deira on
the death of Aelli (II, 1, p. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>), and Ethelfrid ruled over both the
Northumbrian kingdoms from 593 to 617.</note>
governed the kingdom of the Northumbrians, and ravaged
the Britons more than all the chiefs of the English, insomuch
that he might be compared to Saul of old, king of
the Israelites, save only in this, that he was ignorant of
Divine religion. For he conquered more territories from
the Britons than any other chieftain or king, either
subduing the inhabitants and making them tributary, or
driving them out and planting the English in their places.
To him might justly be applied the saying of the patriarch
blessing his son in the person of Saul, <q>Benjamin shall
ravin as a wolf; in the morning he shall devour the
prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil.</q><note place='foot'>Gen., xlix, 27.</note> Hereupon,
Aedan, king of the Scots that dwell in Britain,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, the Dalriadic Scots, <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_I'>1</ref>, and note. For Aedan and
his wars, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Rhŷs, <q>Celtic Britain,</q> pp. 157-159.</note> being
alarmed by his success, came against him with a great
and mighty army, but was defeated and fled with a few
followers; for almost all his army was cut to pieces at a
famous place, called Degsastan, that is, Degsa Stone.<note place='foot'>Perhaps Dalston, near Carlisle; more probably, on philological
grounds, Dawstane Rig in Liddesdale; <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Skene, <q>Celtic
Scotland,</q> I, p. 162.</note>
In which battle also Theodbald, brother to Ethelfrid,
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
was killed, with almost all the forces he commanded.
This war Ethelfrid brought to an end in the year of our
Lord 603, the eleventh of his own reign, which lasted
twenty-four years, and the first year of the reign of
Phocas, who then was at the head of the Roman empire.
From that time, no king of the Scots durst come into
Britain to make war on the English to this day.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Book II</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_II_Chap_I'/>
<head>Chap. I. Of the death of the blessed Pope Gregory.<note place='foot'>For a detailed study of St. Gregory, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <q>Gregory the Great,
his place in History and Thought,</q> by F. Homes Dudden, B.D.
(1905). The oldest biographies are: (1) a Life of Gregory, written
by a monk of Whitby, probably about 713 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, recently discovered
in a MS. belonging to the Monastery of St. Gallen; (2) the Life
by Paul the Deacon, written towards the end of the eighth century;
(3) the Life by John the Deacon, written about the end of the
ninth century.</note>
[604 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
At this time, that is, in the year of our Lord 605,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXIII'>I, 23</ref>. Gregory's pontificate extended from 590 to 604.</note> the
blessed Pope Gregory, after having most gloriously
governed the Roman Apostolic see thirteen years, six
months, and ten days, died, and was translated to an
eternal abode in the kingdom of Heaven. Of whom,
seeing that by his zeal he converted our nation, the
English, from the power of Satan to the faith of Christ,
it behoves us to discourse more at large in our Ecclesiastical
History, for we may rightly, nay, we must, call him
our apostle; because, as soon as he began to wield the
pontifical power over all the world, and was placed over
the Churches long before converted to the true faith, he
made our nation, till then enslaved to idols, the Church
of Christ, so that concerning him we may use those
words of the Apostle; <q>if he be not an apostle to others,
yet doubtless he is to us; for the seal of his apostleship
are we in the Lord.</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor., ix, 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
He was by nation a Roman, son of Gordianus, tracing
his descent from ancestors that were not only noble, but
religious. Moreover Felix, once bishop of the same
Apostolic see, a man of great honour in Christ and in
the Church, was his forefather.<note place='foot'>We cannot be certain which Felix is meant. The choice seems
to lie between Felix III, Bishop of Rome, 483-492, and Felix IV,
526-530. Mr. Homes Dudden decides in favour of the latter, on the
authority of John the Deacon. In either case, the word <foreign rend='italic'>atavus</foreign>
cannot be used in its strict sense.</note> Nor did he show his
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
nobility in religion by less strength of devotion than his
parents and kindred. But that nobility of this world which
was seen in him, by the help of the Divine Grace, he used
only to gain the glory of eternal dignity; for soon quitting
his secular habit, he entered a monastery, wherein
he began to live with so much grace of perfection that
(as he was wont afterwards with tears to testify) his
mind was above all transitory things; that he rose
superior to all that is subject to change; that he used to
think of nothing but what was heavenly; that, whilst detained
by the body, he broke through the bonds of the
flesh by contemplation; and that he even loved death,
which is a penalty to almost all men, as the entrance into
life, and the reward of his labours. This he used to say
of himself, not to boast of his progress in virtue, but
rather to bewail the falling off which he imagined he
had sustained through his pastoral charge. Indeed, once
in a private conversation with his deacon, Peter, after
having enumerated the former virtues of his soul, he
added sorrowfully, <q>But now, on account of the pastoral
charge, it is entangled with the affairs of laymen, and,
after so fair an appearance of inward peace, is defiled with
the dust of earthly action. And having wasted itself on
outward things, by turning aside to the affairs of many
men, even when it desires the inward things, it returns to
them undoubtedly impaired. I therefore consider what I
endure, I consider what I have lost, and when I behold
what I have thrown away, that which I bear appears the
more grievous.</q>
</p>

<p>
So spake the holy man constrained by his great
humility. But it behoves us to believe that he lost nothing
of his monastic perfection by reason of his pastoral
charge, but rather that he gained greater profit through
the labour of converting many, than by the former calm
of his private life, and chiefly because, whilst holding the
pontifical office, he set about organizing his house like a
monastery. And when first drawn from the monastery,
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
ordained to the ministry of the altar, and sent to Constantinople
as representative<note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Apocrisiarius</foreign>, official representative of the see of Rome at the
Imperial Court of Constantinople (Latin: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>responsalis</foreign>). Ducange
explains the word as: <q>nomen inditum legatis, quod ἀποκρίσεις
seu responsa principum deferrent.</q></note> of the Apostolic see, though
he now took part in the secular affairs of the palace, yet
he did not abandon the fixed course of his heavenly life;
for some of the brethren of his monastery, who had
followed him to the royal city in their brotherly love, he
employed for the better observance of monastic rule, to
the end that at all times, by their example, as he writes
himself, he might be held fast to the calm shore of prayer,
as it were, with the cable of an anchor, whilst he should
be tossed up and down by the ceaseless waves of worldly
affairs; and daily in the intercourse of studious reading
with them, strengthen his mind shaken with temporal
concerns. By their company he was not only guarded
against the assaults of the world, but more and more
roused to the exercises of a heavenly life.
</p>

<p>
For they persuaded him to interpret by a mystical exposition
the book of the blessed Job,<note place='foot'>His <q>Moralia,</q> a commentary on the Book of Job, expounding
it historically, allegorically, and in its practical bearing on morals.
His other undoubtedly genuine works are those mentioned in the
text: Twenty-two homilies on Ezekiel; forty homilies on the
Gospels for the day, preached by himself at various times; the
<q>Liber Regulae Pastoralis,</q> on the duties and responsibilities of
the pastoral office, a very widely studied book; four books of
Dialogues, <q>De vita et miraculis patrum Italicorum et de aeternitate
animae,</q> also one of his most famous works; and fourteen
books of letters to various persons on many subjects. There are also
some doubtful works. Of these, the <q>Liber Sacramentorum</q> (<hi rend='italic'>v.
infra</hi>), the <q>Liber Antiphonarius</q> (a collection of Antiphons for
Mass), and the Hymns have been generally regarded as genuine,
but recent research seems to show that they cannot be attributed
to Gregory. That he introduced the <q>Cantus Gregorianus</q> can
also probably be no longer maintained; <hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XX'>20</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi> note.</note> which is involved in
great obscurity; nor could he refuse to undertake that
work, which brotherly affection imposed on him for the
future benefit of many; but in a wonderful manner, in five
and thirty books of exposition, he taught how that same
book is to be understood literally; how to be referred to
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
the mysteries of Christ and the Church; and in what
sense it is to be adapted to every one of the faithful.
This work he began as papal representative in the royal
city, but finished it at Rome after being made pope.
Whilst he was still in the royal city, by the help of the
grace of Catholic truth, he crushed in its first rise a new
heresy which sprang up there, concerning the state of our
resurrection. For Eutychius,<note place='foot'>Patriarch of Constantinople, celebrated as a saint by the
Greeks. He was born at Theium in Phrygia, <hi rend='italic'>circ.</hi> 512 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> Towards
the end of his life he maintained the above theory in a book
on the Resurrection. He was opposed by Gregory, and the book
was burnt by order of the Emperor Tiberius, who, however, visited
him when he fell ill soon after, and received his blessing. He died
on Easter Day, 582, and the <q>heresy</q> was suffered to rest. (He
is, of course, not to be confused with Eutyches, author of the
heresy known as <q>Eutychianism,</q> <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVII'>IV, 17</ref>.)</note> bishop of that city, taught,
that our body, in the glory of resurrection, would be
impalpable, and more subtile than wind and air. The
blessed Gregory hearing this, proved by force of truth,
and by the instance of the Resurrection of our Lord, that
this doctrine was every way opposed to the orthodox
faith. For the Catholic faith holds that our body, raised
by the glory of immortality, is indeed rendered subtile by
the effect of spiritual power, but is palpable by the reality
of nature; according to the example of our Lord's Body,
concerning which, when risen from the dead, He Himself
says to His disciples, <q>Handle Me and see, for a spirit
hath not flesh and bones, as ye see Me have.</q><note place='foot'>St. Luke, xxiv, 39.</note> In maintaining
this faith, the venerable Father Gregory so
earnestly strove against the rising heresy, and with the
help of the most pious emperor, Tiberius Constantine,<note place='foot'>Tiberius II, emperor of the East, 578-582 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
so fully suppressed it, that none has been since found to
revive it.
</p>

<p>
He likewise composed another notable book, the
<q>Liber Pastoralis,</q> wherein he clearly showed what sort
of persons ought to be preferred to rule the Church; how
such rulers ought to live; with how much discrimination
they ought to instruct the different classes of their hearers,
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
and how seriously to reflect every day on their own
frailty. He also wrote forty homilies on the Gospel,
which he divided equally into two volumes; and composed
four books of Dialogues, in which, at the request
of his deacon, Peter, he recounted the virtues of the
more renowned saints of Italy, whom he had either
known or heard of, as a pattern of life for posterity; to
the end that, as he taught in his books of Expositions
what virtues men ought to strive after, so by describing
the miracles of saints, he might make known the glory
of those virtues. Further, in twenty-two homilies, he
showed how much light is latent in the first and last parts
of the prophet Ezekiel, which seemed the most obscure.
Besides which, he wrote the <q>Book of Answers,</q><note place='foot'>I, 27.</note> to
the questions of the holy Augustine, the first bishop of
the English nation, as we have shown above, inserting
the same book entire in this history; and the useful little
<q>Synodical Book,</q><note place='foot'>A Synodical epistle, such as newly-elected bishops were in
the habit of sending to other bishops. The subject-matter is the
same as that of the <q>Pastoral Care.</q></note> which he composed with the bishops
of Italy on necessary matters of the Church; as well
as private letters to certain persons. And it is the more
wonderful that he could write so many lengthy works,
seeing that almost all the time of his youth, to use his
own words, he was frequently tormented with internal
pain, constantly enfeebled by the weakness of his digestion,
and oppressed by a low but persistent fever. But
in all these troubles, forasmuch as he carefully reflected
that, as the Scripture testifies,<note place='foot'>Heb., xii, 6.</note> <q>He scourgeth every
son whom He receiveth,</q> the more severely he suffered
under those present evils, the more he assured himself
of his eternal hope.
</p>

<p>
Thus much may be said of his immortal genius, which
could not be crushed by such severe bodily pains. Other
popes applied themselves to building churches or adorning
them with gold and silver, but Gregory was wholly
intent upon gaining souls. Whatsoever money he had,
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
he took care to distribute diligently and give to the poor,
that his righteousness might endure for ever, and his
horn be exalted with honour; so that the words of the
blessed Job might be truly said of him,<note place='foot'>Job, xxix, 11-17.</note> <q>When the ear
heard me, then it blessed me; and when the eye saw me,
it gave witness to me: because I delivered the poor that
cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to help
him. The blessing of him that was ready to perish came
upon me, and I caused the widow's heart to sing for joy.
I put on righteousness, and it clothed me; my judgement
was as a robe and a diadem. I was eyes to the blind, and
feet was I to the lame. I was a father to the poor; and
the cause which I knew not, I searched out. And I brake
the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his
teeth.</q> And a little after: <q>If I have withheld,</q> says
he, <q>the poor from their desire; or have caused the eyes
of the widow to fail; or have eaten my morsel myself
alone, and the fatherless hath not eaten thereof: (for
from my youth compassion grew up with me, and from
my mother's womb it came forth with me.</q><note place='foot'>The quotation is from the Vulgate (Job, xxxi, 16-18). The
sentence is finished in v. 22: <q>Then let mine arm fall from my
shoulder blade....</q></note>)
</p>

<p>
To his works of piety and righteousness this also may
be added, that he saved our nation, by the preachers he
sent hither, from the teeth of the old enemy, and made it
partaker of eternal liberty. Rejoicing in the faith and
salvation of our race, and worthily commending it with
praise, he says, in his exposition of the blessed Job,
<q>Behold, the tongue of Britain, which only knew how
to utter barbarous cries, has long since begun to raise
the Hebrew Hallelujah to the praise of God! Behold, the
once swelling ocean now serves prostrate at the feet of
the saints; and its wild upheavals, which earthly princes
could not subdue with the sword, are now, through the
fear of God, bound by the lips of priests with words
alone; and the heathen that stood not in awe of troops
of warriors, now believes and fears the tongues of the
humble! For he has received a message from on high
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
and mighty works are revealed; the strength of the
knowledge of God is given him, and restrained by the
fear of the Lord, he dreads to do evil, and with all his
heart desires to attain to everlasting grace.</q> In which
words the blessed Gregory shows us this also, that St.
Augustine and his companions brought the English to
receive the truth, not only by the preaching of words,
but also by showing forth heavenly signs.
</p>

<p>
The blessed Pope Gregory, among other things, caused
Masses to be celebrated in the churches of the holy
Apostles, Peter and Paul, over their bodies. And in the
celebration of Masses, he added three petitions of the
utmost perfection: <q>And dispose our days in thy peace,
and bid us to be preserved from eternal damnation, and
to be numbered in the flock of thine elect.</q><note place='foot'>John the Deacon attributes to Gregory the <q>Liber Sacramentorum,</q>
or Gregorian Sacramentary, a revision of the Gelasian
Sacramentary. It seems probable, however, that it is of much later
date. Only a few alterations in the Liturgy and in the ceremonial
of the Mass are proved to have been effected by Gregory. In the
Canon of the Mass he introduced two changes, viz.: (1) he inserted
the words here quoted; (2) he altered the position of the Lord's
Prayer (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Homes Dudden, pp. 264-271).</note>
</p>

<p>
He governed the Church in the days of the Emperors
Mauritius and Phocas, and passing out of this life in the
second year of the same Phocas,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, 604 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, cf. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXIII'>I, 23</ref>; <ref target='Book_II_Chap_I'>II, 1</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi>, note.</note> he departed to the true
life which is in Heaven. His body was buried in the
church of the blessed Apostle Peter before the sacristy,
on the 12th day of March, to rise one day in the same
body in glory with the rest of the holy pastors of the
Church. On his tomb was written this epitaph:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Receive, O Earth, his body taken from thine own; thou canst
restore it, when God calls to life. His spirit rises to the stars; the
claims of death shall not avail against him, for death itself is but
the way to new life. In this tomb are laid the limbs of a great
pontiff, who yet lives for ever in all places in countless deeds of
mercy. Hunger and cold he overcame with food and raiment, and
shielded souls from the enemy by his holy teaching. And whatsoever
he taught in word, that he fulfilled in deed, that he might be
a pattern, even as he spake words of mystic meaning. By his
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
guiding love he brought the Angles to Christ, gaining armies for
the Faith from a new people. This was thy toil, thy task, thy care,
thy aim as shepherd, to offer to thy Lord abundant increase of the
flock. So, Consul of God, rejoice in this thy triumph, for now thou
hast the reward of thy works for evermore.
</quote>

<p>
Nor must we pass by in silence the story of the
blessed Gregory, handed down to us by the tradition
of our ancestors, which explains his earnest care for the
salvation of our nation. It is said that one day, when
some merchants had lately arrived at Rome, many things
were exposed for sale in the market place, and much
people resorted thither to buy: Gregory himself went
with the rest, and saw among other wares some boys
put up for sale, of fair complexion, with pleasing countenances,
and very beautiful hair. When he beheld them, he
asked, it is said, from what region or country they were
brought? and was told, from the island of Britain, and
that the inhabitants were like that in appearance. He
again inquired whether those islanders were Christians,
or still involved in the errors of paganism, and was informed
that they were pagans. Then fetching a deep
sigh from the bottom of his heart, <q>Alas! what pity,</q>
said he, <q>that the author of darkness should own men
of such fair countenances; and that with such grace of
outward form, their minds should be void of inward
grace.</q> He therefore again asked, what was the name of
that nation? and was answered, that they were called
Angles. <q>Right,</q> said he, <q>for they have an angelic
face, and it is meet that such should be co-heirs with the
Angels in heaven. What is the name of the province from
which they are brought?</q> It was replied, that the
natives of that province were called Deiri.<note place='foot'>Deira was the southern part of the province of Northumbria,
the northern part being Bernicia. Deira was bounded on the south
by the Humber; on the north, according to some authorities, by
the Tyne, according to others, by the Tees. The discrepancy
doubtless arose from the fact that the part between the two latter
rivers was a desert subject to no authority. To the west lay the
British kingdoms.</note> <q>Truly are
they <foreign rend='italic'>De ira</foreign>,</q> said he, <q>saved from wrath, and called to
the mercy of Christ. How is the king of that province
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
called?</q> They told him his name was Aelli;<note place='foot'>The son of Yffi, the first king of Deira. The ancient pedigrees
trace the descent of the royal houses of Deira and Bernicia from
two sons of Woden.</note> and he,
playing upon the name, said, <q>Allelujah, the praise of
God the Creator must be sung in those parts.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then he went to the bishop of the Roman Apostolic
see<note place='foot'>This pope was either Benedict I (574-578) or Pelagius II (578-590),
the immediate predecessor of Gregory. The oldest extant life
of Gregory (<hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> p. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, note) makes him Benedict, and is followed
by John the Deacon. If this is right, the incident related in the
text must be placed before Gregory's departure to Constantinople
in 579. Paul the Deacon places it after his return in 585 or 586,
and asserts that the pope was Pelagius II.</note> (for he was not himself then made pope), and entreated
him to send some ministers of the Word into
Britain to the nation of the English, that it might be
converted to Christ by them; declaring himself ready to
carry out that work with the help of God, if the Apostolic
Pope should think fit to have it done. But not being then
able to perform this task, because, though the Pope was
willing to grant his request, yet the citizens of Rome
could not be brought to consent that he should depart so
far from the city, as soon as he was himself made Pope,
he carried out the long-desired work, sending, indeed,
other preachers, but himself by his exhortations and
prayers helping the preaching to bear fruit. This account,
which we have received from a past generation,
we have thought fit to insert in our Ecclesiastical
History.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_II_Chap_II'/>
<head>Chap. II. How Augustine admonished the bishops of the
Britons on behalf of Catholic peace, and to that end
wrought a heavenly miracle in their presence; and of
the vengeance that pursued them for their contempt.
[<hi rend='italic'>Circ.</hi> 603 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the meantime, Augustine, with the help of King
Ethelbert, drew together to a conference the bishops and
doctors of the nearest province of the Britons, at a place
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
which is to this day called, in the English language,
Augustine's Ác, that is, Augustine's Oak,<note place='foot'>The date of the synod is uncertain. It was probably about
602 or 603 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, after the arrival of Gregory's <q>Responsa.</q> The
<q>nearest province</q> must mean what we call South Wales, though it
is possible that the Britons of Cornwall were also represented. The
scene of the conference has been generally supposed to be Aust,
on the Severn, opposite Chepstow, and the name may possibly
preserve the memory of Augustine, though more probably it is
derived from <q>Trajectus Augusti</q> (Haddan and Stubbs). Other
possible sites are Malmesbury (Green, <q>Making of England</q>),
and a spot called <q>the Oak,</q> near Cricklade, on the Upper
Thames, which would be on the borders of the Hwiccas and West
Saxons (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Plummer, <hi rend='italic'>ad loc.</hi>).</note> on the borders
of the Hwiccas<note place='foot'>The Hwiccas were in the present Gloucestershire and Worcestershire,
north-west of Wessex.</note> and West Saxons; and began by
brotherly admonitions to persuade them to preserve
Catholic peace with him, and undertake the common
labour of preaching the Gospel to the heathen for the
Lord's sake. For they did not keep Easter Sunday at
the proper time, but from the fourteenth to the twentieth
moon; which computation is contained in a cycle of
eighty-four years.<note place='foot'><p>Cf. especially <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXV'>III, 25</ref>, and <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXI'>V, 21</ref>. (Other references are: II, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_IV'>4</ref>,
<ref target='Book_II_Chap_XIX'>19</ref>; III, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_III'>3</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_IV'>4</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVI'>26</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIX'>29</ref>; V, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XV'>15</ref>, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXII'>22</ref>.)
</p>
<p>
A full discussion of this involved question is beyond our scope.
Readers are referred to Plummer (Excursus on Paschal Controversy),
Bright, or Hunt. Here, the point at issue may be briefly
stated. It was regarded as essential by the Roman Church that
Easter Day should be kept on a Sunday, in the third week of the
first month, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the month in which the full moon occurred on or
after the vernal equinox. The Celts observed the Feast on Sunday,
and were, therefore, not rightly called <q>Quartodecimans</q> (the
name given to those who observed it on the 14th of the month
Nisan, the day of the Jewish Passover, without regard to the day
of the week). They differed from the Romans in fixing the vernal
equinox at March 25th, instead of March 21st, and in their reckoning
of the third week, holding it to be from the 14th to the 20th
of the moon inclusive. The Roman Church originally reckoned
it from the 16th to the 22nd, but ultimately fixed it from the 15th
to the 21st (cf. V, 21, p. <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>).
</p>
<p>
There was a further divergence in the <q>cycles</q> adopted to
ascertain the day in each year on which the Paschal moon would
fall. The Celts retained an old cycle of eighty-four years, while
the Romans had finally adopted one of nineteen. It is obvious that
these differences must necessarily lead to great divergence in
practice and consequently serious inconvenience. The real importance
of this and the other points of difference, settled afterwards
at the Synod of Whitby, lay in the question whether England was
to conform to the practice of the Catholic Church, or to isolate
herself from it by local peculiarities (cf. the reply of the British to
Augustine: <q>They would do none of those things nor receive him
as their archbishop</q>).</p></note> Besides, they did many other things
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
which were opposed to the unity of the church.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi>, Consecration of bishops by a single bishop, certain
differences of ritual (Gregory's <q>Responsa</q> admit of some latitude
in these matters), and the tonsure, which was a more controversial
point (cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVI'>III, 26</ref>, and <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXI'>V, 21</ref>). The Romans shaved only
the top of the head, letting the hair grow in the form of a crown.
The Celts shaved the whole front of the head from ear to ear,
leaving the hair at the back. A third method was the Oriental,
which consisted in shaving the whole head (cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_I'>IV, 1</ref>).</note> When,
after a long disputation, they did not comply with the
entreaties, exhortations, or rebukes of Augustine and his
companions, but preferred their own traditions before all
the Churches which are united in Christ throughout the
world, the holy father, Augustine, put an end to this
troublesome and tedious contention, saying, <q>Let us
entreat God, who maketh men to be of one mind in His
Father's house, to vouchsafe, by signs from Heaven, to
declare to us which tradition is to be followed; and by
what path we are to strive to enter His kingdom. Let
some sick man be brought, and let the faith and practice
of him, by whose prayers he shall be healed, be looked
upon as hallowed in God's sight and such as should be
adopted by all.</q> His adversaries unwillingly consenting,
a blind man of the English race was brought, who having
been presented to the British bishops, found no benefit
or healing from their ministry; at length, Augustine,
compelled by strict necessity, bowed his knees to the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying that He would
restore his lost sight to the blind man, and by the bodily
enlightenment of one kindle the grace of spiritual light
in the hearts of many of the faithful. Immediately the
blind man received sight, and Augustine was proclaimed
by all to be a true herald of the light from Heaven. The
Britons then confessed that they perceived that it was the
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
true way of righteousness which Augustine taught; but
that they could not depart from their ancient customs
without the consent and sanction of their people. They
therefore desired that a second time a synod might be appointed,
at which more of their number should be present.
</p>

<p>
This being decreed, there came, it is said, seven
bishops of the Britons,<note place='foot'>The place of the second conference is not mentioned. It is
generally assumed that it was the same as that of the first. All
attempts to determine the names and sees of these bishops rest
upon the most uncertain evidence.</note> and many men of great learning,
particularly from their most celebrated monastery, which
is called, in the English tongue, Bancornaburg,<note place='foot'>Probably Bangor-is-Coed, in Flintshire, from which it appears
that North Wales was represented at the second conference. The
size and importance of the monastery are inferred by William of
Malmesbury, writing in the twelfth century, from the extent of the
ruins, which were all that was left of it in his time.</note> and over
which the Abbot Dinoot<note place='foot'>Dunawd, or Dunod; Latin: Donatus (Rhŷs).</note> is said to have presided at that
time. They that were to go to the aforesaid council, betook
themselves first to a certain holy and discreet man,
who was wont to lead the life of a hermit among them,
to consult with him, whether they ought, at the preaching
of Augustine, to forsake their traditions. He
answered, <q>If he is a man of God, follow him.</q>&mdash;<q>How
shall we know that?</q> said they. He replied,
<q>Our Lord saith, Take My yoke upon you, and learn of
Me, for I am meek and lowly in heart; if therefore,
Augustine is meek and lowly of heart, it is to be believed
that he bears the yoke of Christ himself, and offers it to
you to bear. But, if he is harsh and proud, it is plain
that he is not of God, nor are we to regard his words.</q>
They said again, <q>And how shall we discern even this?</q>&mdash;<q>Do
you contrive,</q> said the anchorite, <q>that he first
arrive with his company at the place where the synod is
to be held; and if at your approach he rises up to you,
hear him submissively, being assured that he is the servant
of Christ; but if he despises you, and does not rise
up to you, whereas you are more in number, let him also
be despised by you.</q>
</p>

<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>

<p>
They did as he directed; and it happened, that as they
approached, Augustine was sitting on a chair. When
they perceived it, they were angry, and charging him
with pride, set themselves to contradict all he said. He
said to them, <q>Many things ye do which are contrary to
our custom, or rather the custom of the universal Church,
and yet, if you will comply with me in these three matters,
to wit, to keep Easter at the due time; to fulfil the
ministry of Baptism, by which we are born again to God,
according to the custom of the holy Roman Apostolic
Church;<note place='foot'>It is not known in what way the practice of the British Church
differed from that of the Romans in the rite of Baptism. It may
have been by the neglect of Confirmation as the completion of
Baptism (cf. <q>compleatis</q> in the text). Other suggestions are:
single immersion (but this was permitted in Spain); the omission
of chrism, an omission which was affirmed of the Irish at a later
period; some defect in the invocation of the Trinity. This conjecture
rests on a canon respecting Baptism established in the
English Church from the time of Augustine (quoted by Haddan
and Stubbs from a letter of Pope Zacharias to Boniface), which
enforces the full invocation.</note> and to join with us in preaching the Word of
God to the English nation, we will gladly suffer all the
other things you do, though contrary to our customs.</q>
They answered that they would do none of those things,
nor receive him as their archbishop; for they said among
themselves, <q>if he would not rise up to us now, how
much more will he despise us, as of no account, if we
begin to be under his subjection?</q> Then the man of
God, Augustine, is said to have threatened them, that
if they would not accept peace with their brethren, they
should have war from their enemies; and, if they would
not preach the way of life to the English nation, they
should suffer at their hands the vengeance of death. All
which, through the dispensation of the Divine judgement,
fell out exactly as he had predicted.
</p>

<p>
For afterwards the warlike king of the English, Ethelfrid,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXXIV'>I, 34</ref>.</note>
of whom we have spoken, having raised a mighty
army, made a very great slaughter of that heretical
nation, at the city of Legions,<note place='foot'>Chester, the seat of the Twentieth legion. <q>Legionum civitas,
quae nunc simpliciter Cestra vocatur.</q> (William of Malmesbury.)
Cf. note on I, 7, p. <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>. The date of the battle cannot be accurately
fixed. The <q>Annales Cambriae</q> give 613, but it may have been
a few years later. Bede only tells us that it was a considerable time
after Augustine's death, which was probably in 604 or 605.</note> which by the English is
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
called Legacaestir, but by the Britons more rightly Carlegion.
Being about to give battle, he observed their
priests, who were come together to offer up their prayers
to God for the combatants, standing apart in a place of
greater safety; he inquired who they were, and what
they came together to do in that place. Most of them
were of the monastery of Bangor,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi> p. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, note 2.</note> in which, it is said,
there was so great a number of monks, that the monastery
being divided into seven parts, with a superior set
over each, none of those parts contained less than three
hundred men, who all lived by the labour of their hands.
Many of these, having observed a fast of three days, had
come together along with others to pray at the aforesaid
battle, having one Brocmail<note place='foot'>Nothing certain is known of this Welsh prince.</note> for their protector, to defend
them, whilst they were intent upon their prayers, against
the swords of the barbarians. King Ethelfrid being informed
of the occasion of their coming, said, <q>If then
they cry to their God against us, in truth, though they
do not bear arms, yet they fight against us, because they
assail us with their curses.</q> He, therefore, commanded
them to be attacked first, and then destroyed the rest of
the impious army, not without great loss of his own
forces. About twelve hundred of those that came to pray
are said to have been killed, and only fifty to have
escaped by flight. Brocmail, turning his back with his
men, at the first approach of the enemy, left those whom
he ought to have defended unarmed and exposed to the
swords of the assailants. Thus was fulfilled the prophecy
of the holy Bishop Augustine, though he himself had
been long before taken up into the heavenly kingdom,
that the heretics should feel the vengeance of temporal
death also, because they had despised the offer of eternal
salvation.
</p>


</div>

<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_II_Chap_III'/>
<head>Chap. III. How St. Augustine made Mellitus and Justus
bishops; and of his death. [604 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 604, Augustine, Archbishop of
Britain, ordained two bishops, to wit, Mellitus and
Justus;<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXIX'>I, 29</ref>, and note.</note> Mellitus to preach to the province of the East-Saxons,
who are divided from Kent by the river Thames,
and border on the Eastern sea. Their metropolis is the
city of London, which is situated on the bank of the
aforesaid river, and is the mart of many nations resorting
to it by sea and land. At that time, Sabert, nephew
to Ethelbert through his sister Ricula, reigned over the
nation, though he was under subjection to Ethelbert,
who, as has been said above, had command over all the
nations of the English as far as the river Humber. But
when this province also received the word of truth, by the
preaching of Mellitus, King Ethelbert built the church of
St. Paul the Apostle,<note place='foot'>The site is covered by the present cathedral.</note> in the city of London, where he
and his successors should have their episcopal see. As
for Justus, Augustine ordained him bishop in Kent, at
the city of Dorubrevis, which the English call Hrofaescaestrae,<note place='foot'>Rochester. The new see was closely dependent on Canterbury,
and till 1148 the archbishop had the appointment to this bishopric.</note>
from one that was formerly the chief man of
it, called Hrof. It is about twenty-four miles distant
from the city of Canterbury to the westward, and in it
King Ethelbert dedicated a church to the blessed Apostle
Andrew,<note place='foot'>Probably in memory of his monastery on the Coelian (cf. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXIII'>I, 23</ref>).
According to Rochester tradition, Ethelbert gave to the church
some land called Priestfield to the south of the city, and other
lands to the north. There exists a charter of Ethelbert to the city
of Rochester, believed to be genuine.</note> and bestowed many gifts on the bishops of
both those churches, as well as on the Bishop of Canterbury,
adding lands and possessions for the use of those
who were associated with the bishops.
</p>

<p>
After this, the beloved of God, our father Augustine,
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
died,<note place='foot'>The year is not given, and is not certainly known. It is generally
assumed to have been 604 or 605.</note> and his body was laid outside, close by the church
of the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul, above spoken of,
because it was not yet finished, nor consecrated, but as
soon as it was consecrated,<note place='foot'>This was in 613, by Laurentius. St. Augustine's body was
translated on September 13th. It was moved again in the twelfth
century and placed under the high altar.</note> the body was brought in,
and fittingly buried in the north chapel<note place='foot'><q>Porticus</q>; variously translated: <q>porch,</q> <q>aisle,</q> <q>transept,</q>
and <q>chapel.</q> Ducange explains it as <q>aedis sacrae
propylaeum in porticus formam exstructum,</q> and says it was also
used improperly for the sanctuary. Plummer (<hi rend='italic'>ad loc.</hi>) says it means
side chapel, as often. The mention of the altar just below seems
to support this meaning (if, indeed, <foreign rend='italic'>haec</foreign> refers to the <q>porticus,</q>
and not to the church itself, as is assumed in the A.S. version).</note> thereof; wherein
also were interred the bodies of all the succeeding archbishops,
except two only, Theodore and Bertwald,
whose bodies are in the church itself, because the aforesaid
chapel could contain no more.<note place='foot'>For Theodore <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Preface'>Preface</ref>, p. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, note 2; <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_I'>IV, 1</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_VIII'>V, 8</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>et saep.</hi>;
and for Bertwald, V, 8. Cuthbert (740-758) was the first archbishop
buried in Christ Church, Canterbury, instead of at St. Augustine's.</note> Almost in the midst
of this chapel is an altar dedicated in honour of the
blessed Pope Gregory, at which every Saturday memorial
Masses are celebrated for the archbishops by a priest of
that place. On the tomb of Augustine is inscribed this
epitaph:
</p>

<p>
<q>Here rests the Lord Augustine, first Archbishop of
Canterbury, who, being of old sent hither by the blessed
Gregory, Bishop of the city of Rome, and supported by
God in the working of miracles, led King Ethelbert
and his nation from the worship of idols to the faith of
Christ, and having ended the days of his office in peace,
died the 26th day of May, in the reign of the same king.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_II_Chap_IV'/>
<head>Chap. IV. How Laurentius and his bishops admonished
the Scots to observe the unity of the Holy Church, particularly
in keeping of Easter; and how Mellitus went
to Rome.</head>

<p>
Laurentius<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXVII'>I, 27</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi></note> succeeded Augustine in the bishopric,
having been ordained thereto by the latter, in his lifetime,
lest, upon his death, the Church, as yet in so unsettled
a state, might begin to falter, if it should be
destitute of a pastor, though but for one hour. Wherein
he also followed the example of the first pastor of the
Church, that is, of the most blessed Peter, chief of the
Apostles, who, having founded the Church of Christ at
Rome, is said to have consecrated Clement to help him
in preaching the Gospel, and at the same time to be his
successor. Laurentius, being advanced to the rank of
archbishop, laboured indefatigably, both by frequent
words of holy exhortation and constant example of good
works to strengthen the foundations of the Church, which
had been so nobly laid, and to carry it on to the fitting
height of perfection. In short, he not only took charge
of the new Church formed among the English, but endeavoured
also to bestow his pastoral care upon the
tribes of the ancient inhabitants of Britain, as also of the
Scots, who inhabit the island of Ireland,<note place='foot'>Bede thus distinguishes them from the colony in Scotland. Cf.
<ref target='Book_I_Chap_I'>I, 1</ref>, and note.</note> which is next
to Britain. For when he understood that the life and
profession of the Scots in their aforesaid country, as well
as of the Britons in Britain, was not truly in accordance
with the practice of the Church in many matters,
especially that they did not celebrate the festival of
Easter at the due time, but thought that the day of the
Resurrection of our Lord ought, as has been said above,
to be observed between the 14th and 20th of the moon;
he wrote, jointly with his fellow bishops, a hortatory
epistle, entreating and conjuring them to keep the unity
of peace and Catholic observance with the Church of
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
Christ spread throughout the world. The beginning of
which epistle is as follows:
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>To our most dear brethren, the Lords Bishops and
Abbots throughout all the country of the Scots,<note place='foot'>Ireland. Iona may be included, as may be inferred from a
comparison of <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXI'>III, 21</ref> (<q>reversus est ad insulam Hii</q>) with <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>III, 24</ref>
(<q>ad Scottiam rediit</q>). But Bede does not use <q>Scottia</q> for
Scotland.</note> Laurentius,
Mellitus, and Justus, Bishops, servants of the servants of
God.</hi> When the Apostolic see, according to the universal
custom which it has followed elsewhere, sent us to these
western parts to preach to pagan nations, and it was our
lot to come into this island, which is called Britain, before
we knew them, we held both the Britons and Scots in
great esteem for sanctity, believing that they walked
according to the custom of the universal Church; but
becoming acquainted with the Britons, we thought that
the Scots had been better. Now we have learnt from
Bishop Dagan,<note place='foot'>Bishop of Inver Daeile (Ennereilly) in Wicklow.</note> who came into this aforesaid island, and
the Abbot Columban,<note place='foot'>The most famous of the great Irish missionaries who laboured
on the Continent. He was born in Leinster about 540, went to
Gaul about 574, founded three monasteries (Annegray, Luxeuil, and
Fontaines), worked for twenty years among the Franks and Burgundians,
afterwards among the Suevi and Alemanni, and finally
in Italy, where he founded a monastery at Bobbio and died there
in 615. He was a vigorous supporter of the Celtic usages and an
active opponent of Arianism. He instituted a monastic rule of
great severity.</note> in Gaul, that the Scots in no way
differ from the Britons in their walk; for when Bishop
Dagan came to us, not only did he refuse to eat at the
same table, but even to eat in the same house where we
were entertained.</q>
</p>

<p>
Also Laurentius with his fellow bishops wrote a letter
to the bishops of the Britons, suitable to his degree, by
which he endeavoured to confirm them in Catholic unity;
but what he gained by so doing the present times still show.
</p>

<p>
About this time, Mellitus, bishop of London, went to
Rome, to confer with the Apostolic Pope Boniface about
the necessary affairs of the English Church. And the
same most reverend pope, assembling a synod of the
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
bishops of Italy,<note place='foot'>Nothing more is known of this council. The pope was Boniface
IV, 608-615.</note> to prescribe rules for the life and peace
of the monks, Mellitus also sat among them, in the
eighth year of the reign of the Emperor Phocas, the thirteenth
indiction, on the 27th of February,<note place='foot'>610 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> to the end that
he also might sign and confirm by his authority whatsoever
should be regularly decreed, and on his return into
Britain might carry the decrees to the Churches of the
English, to be committed to them and observed; together
with letters which the same pope sent to the beloved of
God, Archbishop Laurentius, and to all the clergy; as
likewise to King Ethelbert and the English nation. This
pope was Boniface, the fourth after the blessed Gregory,
bishop of the city of Rome. He obtained for the Church
of Christ from the Emperor Phocas the gift of the temple
at Rome called by the ancients Pantheon, as representing
all the gods; wherein he, having purified it from all
defilement, dedicated a church to the holy Mother of
God, and to all Christ's martyrs, to the end that, the
company of devils being expelled, the blessed company
of the saints might have therein a perpetual memorial.<note place='foot'>To commemorate the dedication the pope introduced into the
Western Church the Festival of All Saints, celebrated at first probably
on 13th May. The Eastern Church had from early times
observed a Festival of All Martyrs, which became later the Festival
of All Saints, kept by them on the Sunday after Whitsunday.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_II_Chap_V'/>
<head>Chap. V. How, after the death of the kings Ethelbert
and Sabert, their successors restored idolatry; for which
reason, both Mellitus and Justus departed out of Britain.
[616 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 616, which is the twenty-first
year after Augustine and his company were sent to
preach to the English nation, Ethelbert, king of Kent,
having most gloriously governed his temporal kingdom
fifty-six years, entered into the eternal joys of the kingdom
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
of Heaven. He was the third of the English kings
who ruled over all the southern provinces that are divided
from the northern by the river Humber and the borders
contiguous to it;<note place='foot'>As Bretwalda, or paramount sovereign (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Stubbs, <q>Constitutional
History,</q> I, pp. 162-163). Aelli and Ceaulin are not elsewhere
mentioned in this work. For Redwald, <hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XII'>12</ref>;
for Edwin, c. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_IX'>9</ref>, foll.; for Oswald, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_I'>III, 1</ref>, foll.; and for Oswy, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIV'>III,
14</ref>, foll.</note> but the first of all that ascended to the
heavenly kingdom. The first who had the like sovereignty
was Aelli, king of the South-Saxons; the second, Caelin,
king of the West-Saxons, who, in their own language,
is called Ceaulin; the third, as has been said, was Ethelbert,
king of Kent; the fourth was Redwald, king of the
East-Angles, who, even in the life-time of Ethelbert, had
been acquiring the leadership for his own race. The fifth
was Edwin, king of the Northumbrian nation, that is, of
those who live in the district to the north of the river
Humber; his power was greater; he had the overlordship
over all the nations who inhabit Britain, both
English and British, except only the people of Kent;
and he reduced also under the dominion of the English,
the Mevanian Islands<note place='foot'>Anglesea and Man.</note> of the Britons, lying between
Ireland and Britain; the sixth was Oswald, the most
Christian king of the Northumbrians, whose kingdom
was within the same bounds; the seventh, his brother
Oswy, ruled over a kingdom of like extent for a time,
and for the most part subdued and made tributary the
nations of the Picts and Scots, who occupy the northern
parts of Britain: but of that hereafter.
</p>

<p>
King Ethelbert died on the 24th day of the month of
February, twenty-one years after he had received the
faith,<note place='foot'>This is inaccurate and inconsistent with Bede's own statement
in <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>V. 24</ref>. Augustine did not arrive in Britain till 597. The dates
given above, at the beginning of this chapter, are, however, probably
correct, if he means that Ethelbert died twenty-one years
after the dispatch of the mission from Rome.</note> and was buried in St. Martin's chapel within the
church of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, where also
lies his queen, Bertha. Among other benefits which he
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
conferred upon his nation in his care for them, he established,
with the help of his council of wise men,<note place='foot'>The Witenagemot, the supreme assembly. This is the first
recorded instance of its legislative action. The <q>decisions</q> are
the so-called <q>dooms.</q></note> judicial
decisions, after the Roman model; which are written
in the language of the English, and are still kept and
observed by them. Among which, he set down first what
satisfaction should be given by any one who should steal
anything belonging to the Church, the bishop, or the
other clergy, for he was resolved to give protection to
those whom he had received along with their doctrine.
</p>

<p>
This Ethelbert was the son of Irminric, whose father
was Octa, whose father was Oeric, surnamed Oisc, from
whom the kings of Kent are wont to be called Oiscings.<note place='foot'><q>&mdash;ing</q> is a Saxon patronymic.</note>
His father was Hengist, who, being invited by Vortigern,
first came into Britain, with his son Oisc, as has been
said above.
</p>

<p>
But after the death of Ethelbert, the accession of his son
Eadbald proved very harmful to the still tender growth
of the new Church; for he not only refused to accept the
faith of Christ, but was also defiled with such fornication,
as the Apostle testifies, as is not so much as named among
the Gentiles, that one should have his father's wife.<note place='foot'>It was Ethelbert's second wife. Bertha had died before
him.</note> By
both which crimes he gave occasion to those to return to
their former uncleanness, who, under his father, had,
either for favour or fear of the king, submitted to the
laws of the faith and of a pure life. Nor did the unbelieving
king escape without the scourge of Divine
severity in chastisement and correction; for he was
troubled with frequent fits of madness, and possessed by
an unclean spirit. The storm of this disturbance was increased
by the death of Sabert, king of the East Saxons,
who departing to the heavenly kingdom, left three sons,
still pagans, to inherit his temporal crown. They immediately
began openly to give themselves up to idolatry,
which, during their father's lifetime, they had seemed
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
somewhat to abandon, and they granted free licence to
their subjects to serve idols. And when they saw the
bishop, whilst celebrating Mass in the church, give the
Eucharist to the people, filled, as they were, with folly
and ignorance, they said to him, as is commonly reported,
<q>Why do you not give us also that white bread,
which you used to give to our father Saba (for so they
were wont to call him), and which you still continue to
give to the people in the church?</q> To whom he answered,
<q>If you will be washed in that font of salvation, in which
your father was washed, you may also partake of the
holy Bread of which he partook; but if you despise the
laver of life, you can in no wise receive the Bread of
life.</q> They replied, <q>We will not enter into that font,
because we know that we do not stand in need of it, and
yet we will be refreshed by that bread.</q> And being
often earnestly admonished by him, that this could by
no means be done, nor would any one be admitted to partake
of the sacred Oblation without the holy cleansing, at
last, they said, filled with rage, <q>If you will not comply
with us in so small a matter as that which we require,
you shall not stay in our province.</q> And they drove
him out and bade him and his company depart from
their kingdom. Being driven thence, he came into Kent,
to take counsel with his fellow bishops, Laurentius and
Justus, and learn what was to be done in that case;
and with one consent they determined that it was better
for them all to return to their own country, where they
might serve God in freedom of mind, than to continue to
no purpose among barbarians, who had revolted from
the faith. Mellitus and Justus accordingly went away
first, and withdrew into the parts of Gaul, intending
there to await the event. But the kings, who had driven
from them the herald of the truth, did not continue long
unpunished in their worship of devils. For marching
out to battle against the nation of the Gewissi,<note place='foot'>Or Gewissae. The West Saxons, an antiquated term for them.
Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>III, 7</ref>: <q>Occidentalium Saxonum, qui antiquitus Gewissae
vocabantur</q> (cf. <q>visi</q> = west, in <q>Visigoth</q>).</note> they
were all slain with their army. Nevertheless, the people,
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
having been once turned to wickedness, though the
authors of it were destroyed, would not be corrected,
nor return to the unity of faith and charity which is in
Christ.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_II_Chap_VI'/>
<head>Chap. VI. How Laurentius, being reproved by the Apostle
Peter, converted King Eadbald to Christ; and how the
king soon recalled Mellitus and Justus to preach the
Word. [617-618 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Laurentius, being about to follow Mellitus and Justus,
and to quit Britain, ordered his bed to be laid that night
in the church of the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul,
which has been often mentioned before; wherein having
laid himself to rest, after he had with tears poured forth
many prayers to God for the state of the Church, he fell
asleep; in the dead of night, the blessed chief of the
Apostles appeared to him, and scourging him grievously
a long time, asked of him with apostolic severity, why
he was forsaking the flock which he had committed
to him? or to what shepherd he was leaving, by his
flight, Christ's sheep that were in the midst of wolves?
<q>Hast thou,</q> he said, <q>forgotten my example, who, for
the sake of those little ones, whom Christ commended
to me in token of His affection, underwent at the hands
of infidels and enemies of Christ, bonds, stripes, imprisonment,
afflictions, and lastly, death itself, even
the death of the cross, that I might at last be crowned
with Him?</q> Laurentius, the servant of Christ, roused
by the scourging of the blessed Peter and his words of
exhortation, went to the king as soon as morning broke,
and laying aside his garment, showed the scars of the
stripes which he had received. The king, astonished,
asked who had presumed to inflict such stripes on so
great a man. And when he heard that for the sake of
his salvation the bishop had suffered these cruel blows
at the hands of the Apostle of Christ, he was greatly
afraid; and abjuring the worship of idols, and renouncing
his unlawful marriage, he received the faith of Christ,
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
and being baptized, promoted and supported the interests
of the Church to the utmost of his power.
</p>

<p>
He also sent over into Gaul, and recalled Mellitus and
Justus, and bade them return to govern their churches in
freedom. They came back one year after their departure,
and Justus returned to the city of Rochester, where he
had before presided; but the people of London would
not receive Bishop Mellitus, choosing rather to be under
their idolatrous high priests; for King Eadbald had not
so much authority in the kingdom as his father, and was
not able to restore the bishop to his church against the
will and consent of the pagans. But he and his nation,
after his conversion to the Lord, sought to obey the
commandments of God. Lastly, he built the church of
the holy Mother of God,<note place='foot'>At Canterbury, to the east of the church of SS. Peter and
Paul, to which it was afterwards joined.</note> in the monastery of the most
blessed chief of the Apostles, which was afterwards consecrated
by Archbishop Mellitus.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_II_Chap_VII'/>
<head>Chap. VII. How Bishop Mellitus by prayer quenched
a fire in his city. [619 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In this king's reign, the blessed Archbishop Laurentius
was taken up to the heavenly kingdom: he was buried
in the church and monastery of the holy Apostle Peter,
close by his predecessor Augustine, on the 2nd day of the
month of February.<note place='foot'>619 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> Mellitus, who was bishop of London,
succeeded to the see of Canterbury, being the third archbishop
from Augustine; Justus, who was still living,
governed the church of Rochester. These ruled the
Church of the English with much care and industry, and
received letters of exhortation from Boniface,<note place='foot'>Boniface V.</note> bishop of
the Roman Apostolic see, who presided over the Church
after Deusdedit, in the year of our Lord 619. Mellitus
laboured under the bodily infirmity of gout, but his mind
was sound and active, cheerfully passing over all earthly
things, and always aspiring to love, seek, and attain to
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
those which are celestial. He was noble by birth, but
still nobler by the elevation of his mind.
</p>

<p>
In short, that I may give one instance of his power,
from which the rest may be inferred, it happened once
that the city of Canterbury, being set on fire through
carelessness, was in danger of being consumed by the
spreading conflagration; water was thrown on the fire
in vain; a considerable part of the city was already destroyed,
and the fierce flames were advancing towards the
bishop's abode, when he, trusting in God, where human
help failed, ordered himself to be carried towards the
raging masses of fire which were spreading on every
side. The church of the four crowned Martyrs<note place='foot'>Their names are said to have been: Severus, Severianus,
Victorinus, and Carpophorus (v. addition to Bede's Martyrology at
8th November). They suffered martyrdom at Rome in the Diocletian
persecution. A church was erected in their honour on the
Coelian, and on its site stands the present church of the Santi
Quattro Coronati.</note> was in
the place where the fire raged most fiercely. The bishop,
being carried thither by his servants, weak as he was,
set about averting by prayer the danger which the strong
hands of active men had not been able to overcome with
all their exertions. Immediately the wind, which blowing
from the south had spread the conflagration throughout
the city, veered to the north, and thus prevented the
destruction of those places that had been exposed to
its full violence, then it ceased entirely and there was a
calm, while the flames likewise sank and were extinguished.
And because the man of God burned with the
fire of divine love, and was wont to drive away the
storms of the powers of the air, by his frequent prayers
and at his bidding, from doing harm to himself, or his
people, it was meet that he should be allowed to prevail
over the winds and flames of this world, and to obtain
that they should not injure him or his.
</p>

<p>
This archbishop also, having ruled the church five
years, departed to heaven in the reign of King Eadbald,
and was buried with his fathers in the monastery and
church, which we have so often mentioned, of the most
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
blessed chief of the Apostles, in the year of our Lord 624,
on the 24th day of April.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_II_Chap_VIII'/>
<head>Chap. VIII. How Pope Boniface sent the Pall and a
letter to Justus, successor to Mellitus. [624 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Justus, bishop of the church of Rochester, immediately
succeeded Mellitus in the archbishopric. He consecrated
Romanus bishop of that see in his own stead, having
obtained authority to ordain bishops from Pope Boniface,
whom we mentioned above as successor to Deusdedit:
of which licence this is the form:
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Boniface, to his most beloved brother Justus.</hi> We have
learnt not only from the contents of your letter addressed
to us, but from the fulfilment granted to your work, how
faithfully and vigilantly you have laboured, my brother,
for the Gospel of Christ; for Almighty God has not forsaken
either the mystery of His Name, or the fruit of
your labours, having Himself faithfully promised to the
preachers of the Gospel, <q>Lo! I am with you alway,
even unto the end of the world</q>;<note place='foot'>St. Matt., xxviii, 20.</note> which promise His
mercy has particularly manifested in this ministry imposed
upon you, opening the hearts of the nations to
receive the wondrous mystery of your preaching. For He
has blessed with a rich reward your Eminence's acceptable
course, by the support of His loving kindness; granting
a plentiful increase to your labours in the faithful
management of the talents committed to you, and bestowing
it on that which you might confirm to many
generations.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, the reward is bestowed on that gift of faithful and successful
service which he might hand on in its results to posterity.
But the text is probably corrupt, and it is difficult to extract sense
from it.</note> This is conferred on you by that recompense
whereby, constantly persevering in the ministry
imposed upon you, you have awaited with praiseworthy
patience the redemption of that nation, and that they
might profit by your merits, salvation has been bestowed
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
on them. For our Lord Himself says, <q>He that endureth
to the end shall be saved.</q><note place='foot'>St. Matt., x, 22.</note> You are, therefore, saved by
the hope of patience, and the virtue of endurance, to the
end that the hearts of unbelievers, being cleansed from
their natural disease of superstition, might obtain the
mercy of their Saviour: for having received letters from
our son Adulwald,<note place='foot'>He means Eadbald.</note> we perceive with how much knowledge
of the Sacred Word you, my brother, have brought
his mind to the belief in true conversion and the certainty
of the faith. Therefore, firmly confiding in the long-suffering
of the Divine clemency, we believe that, through
the ministry of your preaching, there will ensue most
full salvation not only of the nations subject to him, but
also of their neighbours; to the end, that as it is written,
the recompense of a perfect work may be conferred on
you by the Lord, the Rewarder of all the just; and that
the universal confession of all nations, having received
the mystery of the Christian faith, may declare, that in
truth <q>Their sound is gone out into all the earth, and
their words unto the end of the world.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. xix, 4.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>We have also, my brother, moved by the warmth of
our goodwill, sent you by the bearer of these presents,
the pall, giving you authority to use it only in the celebration
of the Sacred Mysteries; granting to you likewise
to ordain bishops when there shall be occasion, through
the Lord's mercy; that so the Gospel of Christ, by the
preaching of many, may be spread abroad in all the
nations that are not yet converted. You must, therefore,
endeavour, my brother, to preserve with unblemished
sincerity of mind that which you have received through
the kindness of the Apostolic see, bearing in mind what
it is that is represented by the honourable vestment which
you have obtained to be borne on your shoulders. And
imploring the Divine mercy, study to show yourself such
that you may present before the tribunal of the Supreme
Judge that is to come, the rewards of the favour granted
to you, not with guiltiness, but with the benefit of souls.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>God preserve you in safety, most dear brother!</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_II_Chap_IX'/>
<head>Chap. IX. Of the reign of King Edwin, and how Paulinus,
coming to preach the Gospel, first converted his
daughter and others to the mysteries of the faith of
Christ. [625-626 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
At this time the nation of the Northumbrians, that is,
the English tribe dwelling on the north side of the river
Humber, with their king, Edwin,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. 5, p. <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>.</note> received the Word of
faith through the preaching of Paulinus,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXIX'>I, 29</ref>.</note> of whom we
have before spoken. This king, as an earnest of his reception
of the faith, and his share in the heavenly kingdom,
received an increase also of his temporal realm, for
he reduced under his dominion all the parts of Britain<note place='foot'>Except Kent. Cf. <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>, c. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_V'>5</ref>.</note>
that were provinces either of the English, or of the
Britons, a thing which no English king had ever done
before; and he even subjected to the English the Mevanian
islands, as has been said above.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note> The more important
of these, which is to the southward, is the larger in
extent, and more fruitful, containing nine hundred and
sixty families, according to the English computation;
the other contains above three hundred.
</p>

<p>
The occasion of this nation's reception of the faith was
the alliance by marriage of their aforesaid king with the
kings of Kent, for he had taken to wife Ethelberg,
otherwise called Tata,<note place='foot'>A term of endearment.</note> daughter to King Ethelbert.
When he first sent ambassadors to ask her in marriage
of her brother Eadbald, who then reigned in Kent, he
received the answer, <q>That it was not lawful to give a
Christian maiden in marriage to a pagan husband, lest
the faith and the mysteries of the heavenly King should
be profaned by her union with a king that was altogether
a stranger to the worship of the true God.</q> This answer
being brought to Edwin by his messengers, he promised
that he would in no manner act in opposition to the
Christian faith, which the maiden professed; but would
give leave to her, and all that went with her, men and
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
women, bishops and clergy, to follow their faith and
worship after the custom of the Christians. Nor did he
refuse to accept that religion himself, if, being examined
by wise men, it should be found more holy and more
worthy of God.
</p>

<p>
So the maiden was promised, and sent to Edwin, and
in accordance with the agreement, Paulinus, a man beloved
of God, was ordained bishop, to go with her, and
by daily exhortations, and celebrating the heavenly
Mysteries, to confirm her and her company, lest they
should be corrupted by intercourse with the pagans.
Paulinus was ordained bishop by the Archbishop Justus,
on the 21st day of July, in the year of our Lord 625, and
so came to King Edwin with the aforesaid maiden as an
attendant on their union in the flesh. But his mind was
wholly bent upon calling the nation to which he was sent
to the knowledge of truth; according to the words of the
Apostle, <q>To espouse her to the one true Husband, that
he might present her as a chaste virgin to Christ.</q><note place='foot'>2 Cor., xi, 2.</note>
Being come into that province, he laboured much, not
only to retain those that went with him, by the help of
God, that they should not abandon the faith, but, if haply
he might, to convert some of the pagans to the grace of
the faith by his preaching. But, as the Apostle says,
though he laboured long in the Word, <q>The god of this
world blinded the minds of them that believed not, lest
the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine
unto them.</q><note place='foot'>2 Cor., iv, 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
The next year there came into the province one called
Eumer, sent by the king of the West-Saxons, whose
name was Cuichelm,<note place='foot'>Apparently joint king with his father, Cynegils (<ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>III, 7</ref>). The
hegemony which the West-Saxon Ceaulin had possessed (<hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_V'>5</ref>)
had passed to Northumbria.</note> to lie in wait for King Edwin, in
hopes at once to deprive him of his kingdom and his life.
He had a two-edged dagger, dipped in poison, to the
end that, if the wound inflicted by the weapon did not
avail to kill the king, it might be aided by the deadly
venom. He came to the king on the first day of the Easter
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
festival,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, Easter Eve, April 19th, 626.</note> at the river Derwent, where there was then a
royal township,<note place='foot'>Supposed to be at Aldby, near Stamford Bridge, but other
conjectures have been advanced.</note> and being admitted as if to deliver a
message from his master, whilst unfolding in cunning
words his pretended embassy, he started up on a sudden,
and unsheathing the dagger under his garment, assaulted
the king. When Lilla, the king's most devoted servant,
saw this, having no buckler at hand to protect the king
from death, he at once interposed his own body to receive
the blow; but the enemy struck home with such force,
that he wounded the king through the body of the
slaughtered thegn. Being then attacked on all sides with
swords, in the confusion he also slew impiously with
his dagger another of the thegns, whose name was
Forthhere.
</p>

<p>
On that same holy Easter night, the queen had brought
forth to the king a daughter, called Eanfled. The king,
in the presence of Bishop Paulinus, gave thanks to his
gods for the birth of his daughter; and the bishop, on
his part, began to give thanks to Christ, and to tell the
king, that by his prayers to Him he had obtained that
the queen should bring forth the child in safety, and
without grievous pain. The king, delighted with his
words, promised, that if God would grant him life and
victory over the king by whom the murderer who had
wounded him had been sent, he would renounce his
idols, and serve Christ; and as a pledge that he would
perform his promise, he delivered up that same daughter
to Bishop Paulinus, to be consecrated to Christ. She
was the first to be baptized of the nation of the Northumbrians,
and she received Baptism on the holy day of
Pentecost, along with eleven others of her house.<note place='foot'>Twelve in some MSS. and in <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>V, 24</ref>. The baptism was on the
Eve of Whitsunday (cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>V. 24</ref>, <q>in Sabbato Pentecostes</q>). The
Eves of Easter and Whitsunday were usual days for baptisms; the
Roman Church tried to limit them to these seasons, but Christmas
and Epiphany were also favourite times.</note> At
that time, the king, being recovered of the wound which
he had received, raised an army and marched against
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
the nation of the West-Saxons; and engaging in war,
either slew or received in surrender all those of whom he
learned that they had conspired to murder him. So he
returned victorious into his own country, but he would
not immediately and unadvisedly embrace the mysteries
of the Christian faith, though he no longer worshipped
idols, ever since he made the promise that he would
serve Christ; but first took heed earnestly to be instructed
at leisure by the venerable Paulinus, in the knowledge of
faith, and to confer with such as he knew to be the wisest
of his chief men, inquiring what they thought was fittest
to be done in that case. And being a man of great
natural sagacity, he often sat alone by himself a long
time in silence, deliberating in the depths of his heart
how he should proceed, and to which religion he should
adhere.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. X. How Pope Boniface, by letter, exhorted the
same king to embrace the faith. [<hi rend='italic'>Circ.</hi> 625 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
At this time he received a letter from Pope Boniface<note place='foot'>Boniface V, unless, as Dr. Bright suggests, the name is a
scribe's error for Honorius, his successor. Boniface V died in
October, 625. Paulinus had only been consecrated in the preceding
July, so it is impossible that Boniface could have heard of Edwin's
delay in receiving the faith; <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> following letter (c. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XI'>11</ref>). But there
is a reference in the same letter to Eadbald's conversion, the news
of which must have come in the time of Boniface rather than of
Honorius. The difficulty is not cleared up.</note>
exhorting him to embrace the faith, which was as
follows:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
COPY OF THE LETTER OF THE MOST BLESSED AND APOSTOLIC
POPE OF THE CHURCH OF THE CITY OF ROME, BONIFACE,
ADDRESSED TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS EDWIN, KING OF THE
ENGLISH.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>To the illustrious Edwin, king of the English, Bishop
Boniface, the servant of the servants of God.</hi> Although
the power of the Supreme Deity cannot be expressed by
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
the function of human speech, seeing that, by its own
greatness, it so consists in invisible and unsearchable
eternity, that no keenness of wit can comprehend or express
how great it is; yet inasmuch as His Humanity,
having opened the doors of the heart to receive Himself,
mercifully, by secret inspiration, puts into the minds of
men such things as It reveals concerning Itself,<note place='foot'>Reading <q>profert</q> for the impossible <q>proferetur.</q> The style
of this letter is very involved and there seems to be a good deal of
corruption in the text.</note> we have
thought fit to extend our episcopal care so far as to make
known to you the fulness of the Christian faith; to the end
that, bringing to your knowledge the Gospel of Christ,
which our Saviour commanded should be preached to all
nations, we might offer to you the cup of the means of
salvation.<note place='foot'>Adopting the conjecture <q>propinemus.</q></note></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Thus the goodness of the Supreme Majesty, which,
by the word alone of His command, made and created all
things, the heaven, the earth, the sea, and all that in them
is, disposing the order by which they should subsist, hath,
ordaining all things, with the counsel of His co-eternal
Word, and the unity of the Holy Spirit, made man after
His own image and likeness, forming him out of the mire
of the earth; and granted him such high privilege of distinction,
as to place him above all else; so that, preserving
the bounds of the law of his being, his substance
should be established to eternity. This God,&mdash;Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, the undivided Trinity,&mdash;from the
east unto the west, through faith by confession to the
saving of their souls, men worship and adore as the
Creator of all things, and their own Maker; to Whom
also the heights of empire and the powers of the world
are subject, because the pre-eminence of all kingdoms is
granted by His disposition. It hath pleased Him, therefore,
in the mercy of His loving kindness, and for the
greater benefit of all His creatures,<note place='foot'>The MSS. reading (<q>totius creaturae suae dilatandi subdi</q>)
yields no sense here, but no satisfactory conjecture has been made.</note> by the fire of His
Holy Spirit wonderfully to kindle the cold hearts even of
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
the nations seated at the extremities of the earth in the
knowledge of Himself.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>For we suppose, since the two countries are near
together, that your Highness has fully understood what
the clemency of our Redeemer has effected in the enlightenment
of our illustrious son, King Eadbald, and
the nations under his rule; we therefore trust, with
assured confidence that, through the long-suffering of
Heaven, His wonderful gift will be also conferred on
you; since, indeed, we have learnt that your illustrious
consort, who is discerned to be one flesh with you, has
been blessed with the reward of eternity, through the regeneration
of Holy Baptism. We have, therefore, taken
care by this letter, with all the goodwill of heartfelt love,
to exhort your Highness, that, abhorring idols and their
worship, and despising the foolishness of temples, and
the deceitful flatteries of auguries, you believe in God
the Father Almighty, and His Son Jesus Christ, and the
Holy Ghost, to the end that, believing and being released
from the bonds of captivity to the Devil, you may,
through the co-operating power of the Holy and undivided
Trinity, be partaker of the eternal life.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>How great guilt they lie under, who adhere in their
worship to the pernicious superstition of idolatry, appears
by the examples of the perishing of those whom they
worship. Wherefore it is said of them by the Psalmist,
<q>All the gods of the nations are devils,<note place='foot'>From the Vulgate, Ps. xcv, 5 (Ps. xcvi, 5 in our Psalter).</note> but the Lord
made the heavens.</q> And again, <q>Eyes have they, but
they see not; they have ears, but they hear not; noses
have they, but they smell not; they have hands, but they
handle not; feet have they, but they walk not. Therefore
they are made like unto those that place the hope of their
confidence in them.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. cxiii, 5-8 (cxv in our Psalter).</note> For how can they have power to
help any man, that are made out of corruptible matter,
by the hands of your inferiors and subjects, and on which,
by employing human art, you have bestowed a lifeless
similitude of members? which, moreover, unless they
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
be moved by you, will not be able to walk; but, like a
stone fixed in one place, being so formed, and having no
understanding, sunk in insensibility, have no power of
doing harm or good. We cannot, therefore, by any
manner of discernment conceive how you come to be so
deceived as to follow and worship those gods, to whom
you yourselves have given the likeness of a body.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>It behoves you, therefore, by taking upon you the
sign of the Holy Cross, by which the human race has been
redeemed, to root out of your hearts all the accursed
deceitfulness of the snares of the Devil, who is ever the
jealous foe of the works of the Divine Goodness, and to
put forth your hands and with all your might set to work
to break in pieces and destroy those which you have
hitherto fashioned of wood or stone to be your gods.
For the very destruction and decay of these, which never
had the breath of life in them, nor could in any wise
receive feeling from their makers, may plainly teach
you how worthless that was which you hitherto worshipped.
For you yourselves, who have received the
breath of life from the Lord, are certainly better than
these which are wrought with hands, seeing that Almighty
God has appointed you to be descended, after
many ages and through many generations, from the first
man whom he formed. Draw near, then, to the knowledge
of Him Who created you, Who breathed the breath
of life into you, Who sent His only-begotten Son for
your redemption, to save you from original sin, that
being delivered from the power of the Devil's perversity
and wickedness, He might bestow on you a heavenly
reward.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Hearken to the words of the preachers, and the
Gospel of God, which they declare to you, to the end
that, believing, as has been said before more than once,
in God the Father Almighty, and in Jesus Christ His Son,
and the Holy Ghost, and the indivisible Trinity, having
put to flight the thoughts of devils, and driven from you
the temptations of the venomous and deceitful enemy,
and being born again of water and the Holy Ghost, you
may, through the aid of His bounty, dwell in the brightness
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
of eternal glory with Him in Whom you shall have
believed.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>We have, moreover, sent you the blessing of your
protector, the blessed Peter, chief of the Apostles, to
wit, a shirt of proof with one gold ornament, and one
cloak of Ancyra, which we pray your Highness to accept
with all the goodwill with which it is sent by us.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_II_Chap_XI'/>
<head>Chap. XI. How Pope Boniface advised the king's consort
to use her best endeavours for his salvation. [<hi rend='italic'>Circ.</hi>
625 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
The same pope also wrote to King Edwin's consort,
Ethelberg, to this effect:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
THE COPY OF THE LETTER OF THE MOST BLESSED AND APOSTOLIC
BONIFACE, POPE OF THE CITY OF ROME, TO ETHELBERG,
KING EDWIN'S QUEEN.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>To the illustrious lady his daughter, Queen Ethelberg,
Boniface, bishop, servant of the servants of God.</hi>
The goodness of our Redeemer has in His abundant
Providence offered the means of salvation to the human
race, which He rescued, by the shedding of His precious
Blood, from the bonds of captivity to the Devil; to the
end that, when He had made known His name in divers
ways to the nations, they might acknowledge their
Creator by embracing the mystery of the Christian faith.
And this the mystical purification of your regeneration
plainly shows to have been bestowed upon the mind of
your Highness by God's gift. Our heart, therefore, has
greatly rejoiced in the benefit bestowed by the bounty of
the Lord, for that He has vouchsafed, in your confession,
to kindle a spark of the orthodox religion, by which He
might the more easily inflame with the love of Himself
the understanding, not only of your illustrious consort,
but also of all the nation that is subject to you.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>For we have been informed by those, who came to
acquaint us with the laudable conversion of our illustrious
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
son, King Eadbald, that your Highness, also, having received
the wonderful mystery of the Christian faith, continually
excels in the performance of works pious and
acceptable to God; that you likewise carefully refrain
from the worship of idols, and the deceits of temples and
auguries, and with unimpaired devotion, give yourself
so wholly to the love of your Redeemer, as never to
cease from lending your aid in spreading the Christian
faith. But when our fatherly love earnestly inquired concerning
your illustrious consort, we were given to understand,
that he still served abominable idols, and delayed
to yield obedience in giving ear to the voice of the
preachers. This occasioned us no small grief, that he
that is one flesh with you still remained a stranger to the
knowledge of the supreme and undivided Trinity. Whereupon
we, in our fatherly care, have not delayed to admonish
and exhort your Christian Highness, to the end
that, filled with the support of the Divine inspiration, you
should not defer to strive, both in season and out of
season, that with the co-operating power of our Lord
and Saviour Jesus Christ, your husband also may be
added to the number of Christians; that so you may
uphold the rights of marriage in the bond of a holy and
unblemished union. For it is written, <q>They twain shall
be one flesh.</q><note place='foot'>Gen., ii, 24; St. Matt., xix, 5; St. Mark, x, 7; Eph., v, 31.</note> How then can it be said, that there is
unity in the bond between you, if he continues a stranger
to the brightness of your faith, separated from it by the
darkness of detestable error?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Wherefore, applying yourself continually to prayer,
do not cease to beg of the long-suffering of the Divine
Mercy the benefits of his illumination; to the end, that
those whom the union of carnal affection has manifestly
made in a manner to be one body, may, after this life
continue in perpetual fellowship, by the unity of faith. Persist,
therefore, illustrious daughter, and to the utmost of
your power endeavour to soften the hardness of his heart
by carefully making known to him the Divine precepts;
pouring into his mind a knowledge of the greatness of
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
that mystery which you have received by faith, and of the
marvellous reward which, by the new birth, you have
been made worthy to obtain. Inflame the coldness of his
heart by the message of the Holy Ghost, that he may
put from him the deadness of an evil worship, and the
warmth of the Divine faith may kindle his understanding
through your frequent exhortations; and so the testimony
of Holy Scripture may shine forth clearly, fulfilled by you,
<q>The unbelieving husband shall be saved by the believing
wife.</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor., vii, 14, cf. 16.</note> For to this end you have obtained the mercy of
the Lord's goodness, that you might restore with increase
to your Redeemer the fruit of faith and of the benefits
entrusted to your hands. That you may be able to fulfil
this task, supported by the help of His loving kindness
we do not cease to implore with frequent prayers.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Having premised thus much, in pursuance of the
duty of our fatherly affection, we exhort you, that when
the opportunity of a bearer shall offer, you will with all
speed comfort us with the glad tidings of the wonderful
work which the heavenly Power shall vouchsafe to perform
by your means in the conversion<note place='foot'>Reading <q>conversione.</q></note> of your consort,
and of the nation subject to you; to the end, that our
solicitude, which earnestly awaits the fulfilment of its
desire in the soul's salvation of you and yours, may, by
hearing from you, be set at rest; and that we, discerning
more fully the light of the Divine propitiation shed abroad
in you, may with a joyful confession abundantly return
due thanks to God, the Giver of all good things, and
to the blessed Peter, the chief of the Apostles.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>We have, moreover, sent you the blessing of your
protector, the blessed Peter, the chief of the Apostles, to
wit, a silver looking-glass, and a gilded ivory comb,
which we pray your Highness to accept with all the
goodwill with which it is sent by us.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_II_Chap_XII'/>
<head>Chap. XII. How Edwin was persuaded to believe by a
vision which he had once seen when he was in exile.
[<hi rend='italic'>Circ.</hi> 616 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Thus wrote the aforesaid Pope Boniface for the salvation
of King Edwin and his nation. But a heavenly vision,
which the Divine Goodness was pleased once to reveal to
this king, when he was in banishment at the court of
Redwald, king of the Angles,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, of East Anglia (Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire).
Cf. c. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_V'>5</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi></note> was of no little use in
urging him to receive and understand the doctrines of
salvation. For when Paulinus perceived that it was a
difficult task to incline the king's proud mind to the
humility of the way of salvation and the reception of the
mystery of the life-giving Cross, and at the same time
was employing the word of exhortation with men, and
prayer to the Divine Goodness, for the salvation of Edwin
and his subjects; at length, as we may suppose, it was
shown him in spirit what the nature of the vision was
that had been formerly revealed from Heaven to the king.
Then he lost no time, but immediately admonished the
king to perform the vow which he had made, when he
received the vision, promising to fulfil it, if he should
be delivered from the troubles of that time, and advanced
to the throne.
</p>

<p>
The vision was this. When Ethelfrid,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXXIV'>I, 34</ref>, and note.</note> his predecessor,
was persecuting him, he wandered for many years as an
exile, hiding in divers places and kingdoms, and at last
came to Redwald, beseeching him to give him protection
against the snares of his powerful persecutor. Redwald
willingly received him, and promised to perform
what was asked of him. But when Ethelfrid understood
that he had appeared in that province, and that he and
his companions were hospitably entertained by Redwald,
he sent messengers to bribe that king with a great sum
of money to murder him, but without effect. He sent a
second and a third time, offering a greater bribe each
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
time, and, moreover, threatening to make war on him if
his offer should be despised. Redwald, whether terrified
by his threats, or won over by his gifts, complied with this
request, and promised either to kill Edwin, or to deliver
him up to the envoys. A faithful friend of his, hearing of
this, went into his chamber, where he was going to bed,
for it was the first hour of the night; and calling him out,
told him what the king had promised to do with him, adding,
<q>If, therefore, you are willing, I will this very hour
conduct you out of this province, and lead you to a place
where neither Redwald nor Ethelfrid shall ever find you.</q>
He answered, <q>I thank you for your good will, yet I
cannot do what you propose, and be guilty of being the
first to break the compact I have made with so great a
king, when he has done me no harm, nor shown any
enmity to me; but, on the contrary, if I must die, let it
rather be by his hand than by that of any meaner man.
For whither shall I now fly, when I have for so many
long years been a vagabond through all the provinces of
Britain, to escape the snares of my enemies?</q> His
friend went away; Edwin remained alone without, and
sitting with a heavy heart before the palace, began to be
overwhelmed with many thoughts, not knowing what to
do, or which way to turn.
</p>

<p>
When he had remained a long time in silent anguish
of mind, consumed with inward fire,<note place='foot'>Cf. Verg. Aen., IV, 2, <q>caeco carpitur igni.</q></note> on a sudden in
the stillness of the dead of night he saw approaching a
person, whose face and habit were strange to him, at
sight of whom, seeing that he was unknown and unlooked
for, he was not a little startled. The stranger
coming close up, saluted him, and asked why he sat
there in solitude on a stone troubled and wakeful at that
time, when all others were taking their rest, and were
fast asleep. Edwin, in his turn, asked, what it was to
him, whether he spent the night within doors or abroad.
The stranger, in reply, said, <q>Do not think that I am
ignorant of the cause of your grief, your watching, and
sitting alone without. For I know of a surety who you
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
are, and why you grieve, and the evils which you fear
will soon fall upon you. But tell me, what reward you
would give the man who should deliver you out of these
troubles, and persuade Redwald neither to do you any
harm himself, nor to deliver you up to be murdered
by your enemies.</q> Edwin replied, that he would give
such an one all that he could in return for so great a
benefit. The other further added, <q>What if he should
also assure you, that your enemies should be destroyed,
and you should be a king surpassing in power, not only
all your own ancestors, but even all that have reigned
before you in the English nation?</q> Edwin, encouraged
by these questions, did not hesitate to promise that he
would make a fitting return to him who should confer
such benefits upon him. Then the other spoke a third
time and said, <q>But if he who should truly foretell that
all these great blessings are about to befall you, could
also give you better and more profitable counsel for your
life and salvation than any of your fathers or kindred ever
heard, do you consent to submit to him, and to follow
his wholesome guidance?</q> Edwin at once promised that
he would in all things follow the teaching of that man
who should deliver him from so many great calamities,
and raise him to a throne.
</p>

<p>
Having received this answer, the man who talked to
him laid his right hand on his head saying, <q>When this
sign shall be given you, remember this present discourse
that has passed between us, and do not delay the performance
of what you now promise.</q> Having uttered
these words, he is said to have immediately vanished.
So the king perceived that it was not a man, but a spirit,
that had appeared to him.
</p>

<p>
Whilst the royal youth still sat there alone, glad of the
comfort he had received, but still troubled and earnestly
pondering who he was, and whence he came, that had so
talked to him, his aforesaid friend came to him, and
greeting him with a glad countenance, <q>Rise,</q> said he,
<q>go in; calm and put away your anxious cares, and
compose yourself in body and mind to sleep; for the
king's resolution is altered, and he designs to do you no
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
harm, but rather to keep his pledged faith; for when he
had privately made known to the queen his intention of
doing what I told you before, she dissuaded him from it,
reminding him that it was altogether unworthy of so great
a king to sell his good friend in such distress for gold,
and to sacrifice his honour, which is more valuable than
all other adornments, for the love of money.</q> In short,
the king did as has been said, and not only refused to
deliver up the banished man to his enemy's messengers,
but helped him to recover his kingdom. For as soon as
the messengers had returned home, he raised a mighty
army to subdue Ethelfrid; who, meeting him with much
inferior forces, (for Redwald had not given him time to
gather and unite all his power,) was slain on the borders
of the kingdom of Mercia, on the east side of the river
that is called Idle.<note place='foot'>A tributary of the Trent. The battle is supposed to have
been fought near Retford, in Nottinghamshire, before April 12th,
617. Cf. Bede's statement that Edwin was baptized on April 12th,
627, in the eleventh year of his reign (c. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XIV'>14</ref>).</note> In this battle, Redwald's son, called
Raegenheri, was killed. Thus Edwin, in accordance with
the prophecy he had received, not only escaped the
danger from his enemy, but, by his death, succeeded the
king on the throne.
</p>

<p>
King Edwin, therefore, delaying to receive the Word
of God at the preaching of Paulinus, and being wont for
some time, as has been said, to sit many hours alone,
and seriously to ponder with himself what he was to do,
and what religion he was to follow, the man of God came
to him one day, laid his right hand on his head, and asked,
whether he knew that sign? The king, trembling, was
ready to fall down at his feet, but he raised him up, and
speaking to him with the voice of a friend, said, <q>Behold,
by the gift of God you have escaped the hands of
the enemies whom you feared. Behold, you have obtained
of His bounty the kingdom which you desired. Take
heed not to delay to perform your third promise; accept
the faith, and keep the precepts of Him Who, delivering
you from temporal adversity, has raised you to the
honour of a temporal kingdom; and if, from this time
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
forward, you shall be obedient to His will, which through
me He signifies to you, He will also deliver you from the
everlasting torments of the wicked, and make you partaker
with Him of His eternal kingdom in heaven.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_II_Chap_XIII'/>
<head>Chap. XIII. Of the Council he held with his chief men
concerning their reception of the faith of Christ, and how
the high priest profaned his own altars. [627 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
The king, hearing these words, answered, that he was
both willing and bound to receive the faith which Paulinus
taught; but that he would confer about it with his chief
friends and counsellors, to the end that if they also
were of his opinion, they might all together be consecrated
to Christ in the font of life. Paulinus consenting,
the king did as he said; for, holding a council with
the wise men,<note place='foot'>The Witenagemot.</note> he asked of every one in particular
what he thought of this doctrine hitherto unknown to
them, and the new worship of God that was preached?
The chief of his own priests, Coifi, immediately answered
him, <q>O king, consider what this is which is now
preached to us; for I verily declare to you what I have
learnt beyond doubt, that the religion which we have
hitherto professed has no virtue in it and no profit. For
none of your people has applied himself more diligently
to the worship of our gods than I; and yet there are
many who receive greater favours from you, and are
more preferred than I, and are more prosperous in all
that they undertake to do or to get. Now if the gods
were good for any thing, they would rather forward me,
who have been careful to serve them with greater zeal.
It remains, therefore, that if upon examination you find
those new doctrines, which are now preached to us,
better and more efficacious, we hasten to receive them
without any delay.</q>
</p>

<p>
Another of the king's chief men, approving of his wise
words and exhortations, added thereafter: <q>The present
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
life of man upon earth, O king, seems to me, in comparison
with that time which is unknown to us, like to
the swift flight of a sparrow through the house wherein
you sit at supper in winter, with your ealdormen and
thegns, while the fire blazes in the midst, and the hall
is warmed, but the wintry storms of rain or snow are
raging abroad. The sparrow, flying in at one door and
immediately out at another, whilst he is within, is safe
from the wintry tempest; but after a short space of fair
weather, he immediately vanishes out of your sight,
passing from winter into winter again. So this life of
man appears for a little while, but of what is to follow or
what went before we know nothing at all. If, therefore,
this new doctrine tells us something more certain, it
seems justly to deserve to be followed.</q> The other elders
and king's counsellors, by Divine prompting, spoke to
the same effect.
</p>

<p>
But Coifi added, that he wished more attentively to
hear Paulinus discourse concerning the God Whom he
preached. When he did so, at the king's command,
Coifi, hearing his words, cried out, <q>This long time I
have perceived that what we worshipped was naught;
because the more diligently I sought after truth in
that worship, the less I found it. But now I freely confess,
that such truth evidently appears in this preaching
as can confer on us the gifts of life, of salvation, and of
eternal happiness. For which reason my counsel is, O
king, that we instantly give up to ban and fire those
temples and altars which we have consecrated without
reaping any benefit from them.</q> In brief, the king
openly assented to the preaching of the Gospel by Paulinus,
and renouncing idolatry, declared that he received
the faith of Christ: and when he inquired of the aforesaid
high priest of his religion, who should first desecrate the
altars and temples of their idols, with the precincts that
were about them, he answered, <q>I; for who can more
fittingly than myself destroy those things which I worshipped
in my folly, for an example to all others, through
the wisdom which has been given me by the true God?</q>
Then immediately, in contempt of his vain superstitions,
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
he desired the king to furnish him with arms and a
stallion, that he might mount and go forth to destroy the
idols; for it was not lawful before for the high priest either
to carry arms, or to ride on anything but a mare. Having,
therefore, girt a sword about him, with a spear in his
hand, he mounted the king's stallion, and went his way
to the idols. The multitude, beholding it, thought that
he was mad; but as soon as he drew near the temple he
did not delay to desecrate it by casting into it the spear
which he held; and rejoicing in the knowledge of the
worship of the true God, he commanded his companions
to tear down and set on fire the temple, with all its precincts.
This place where the idols once stood is still
shown, not far from York, to the eastward, beyond the
river Derwent, and is now called Godmunddingaham,<note place='foot'>Goodmanham, near Market Weighton, in the East Riding of
Yorkshire.</note>
where the high priest, by the inspiration of the true God,
profaned and destroyed the altars which he had himself
consecrated.<note place='foot'>Cf. Verg. Aen., II. 502.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_II_Chap_XIV'/>
<head>Chap. XIV. How King Edwin and his nation became
Christians; and where Paulinus baptized them. [627
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
King Edwin, therefore, with all the nobility of the nation,
and a large number of the common sort, received the
faith, and the washing of holy regeneration, in the
eleventh year of his reign, which is the year of our Lord
627, and about one hundred and eighty after the coming
of the English into Britain. He was baptized at York,
on the holy day of Easter,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, Easter Eve. Cf. c. 9, p. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, note 3.</note> being the 12th of April, in the
church of St. Peter the Apostle, which he himself had
built of timber there in haste, whilst he was a catechumen
receiving instruction in order to be admitted to baptism.
In that city also he bestowed upon his instructor and
bishop, Paulinus, his episcopal see. But as soon as he
was baptized, he set about building, by the direction of
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
Paulinus, in the same place a larger and nobler church
of stone, in the midst whereof the oratory which he had
first erected should be enclosed.<note place='foot'>On the site now covered by York Cathedral. The little wooden
oratory was carefully preserved and adorned with gifts. The
church has been repeatedly rebuilt, and of the Saxon building
nothing remains but the central wall of the crypt.</note> Having, therefore, laid
the foundation, he began to build the church square, encompassing
the former oratory. But before the walls
were raised to their full height, the cruel death<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XX'>20</ref>.</note> of the
king left that work to be finished by Oswald his successor.
Paulinus, for the space of six years from this
time, that is, till the end of the king's reign, with his
consent and favour, preached the Word of God in that
country, and as many as were foreordained to eternal life
believed and were baptized. Among them were Osfrid
and Eadfrid, King Edwin's sons who were both born to
him, whilst he was in banishment, of Quenburga, the
daughter of Cearl, king of the Mercians.
</p>

<p>
Afterwards other children of his, by Queen Ethelberg,
were baptized, Ethelhun and his daughter Ethelthryth,
and another, Wuscfrea, a son; the first two were snatched
out of this life whilst they were still in the white garments
of the newly-baptized,<note place='foot'>The newly-baptized wore white garments till the octave of the
day of their baptism, and appeared in church daily with lighted
tapers and accompanied by their sponsors.</note> and buried in the church
at York. Yffi,<note place='foot'>For Wuscfrea and Yffi, <hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi> c. 20, p. <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>.</note> the son of Osfrid, was also baptized, and
many other noble and royal persons. So great was then
the fervour of the faith, as is reported, and the desire for
the laver of salvation among the nation of the Northumbrians,
that Paulinus at a certain time coming with
the king and queen to the royal township, which is called
Adgefrin,<note place='foot'>Yeavering in Glendale, near Wooler in Northumberland. The
name, Adgefrin, is one of those (common in Anglo-Saxon) in which
the preposition is prefixed. <q>Æt</q> (Latin <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad</foreign>) and <q>in</q> are so
used. The idiom is preserved in the Latin. Cf. Ad Murum, Ad
Caprae Caput (III, 21), Infeppingum <hi rend='italic'>(ibid.), et saep.</hi></note> stayed there with them thirty-six days, fully
occupied in catechizing and baptizing; during which
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
days, from morning till night, he did nothing else but
instruct the people resorting from all villages and places,
in Christ's saving Word; and when they were instructed,
he washed them with the water of absolution in the river
Glen,<note place='foot'>The stream, in its upper reaches called the Bowmont Water,
is still called the Glen at Yeavering. It is a tributary of the Till.
Pallinsburn, in the neighbourhood of Coldstream, preserves by its
name the memory of similar baptisms by Paulinus.</note> which is close by. This township, under the following
kings, was abandoned, and another was built
instead of it, at the place called Maelmin.<note place='foot'>Perhaps Millfield, near Wooler; but Mindrum and Kirknewton
in the same district have also been suggested.</note>
</p>

<p>
These things happened in the province of the Bernicians;
but in that of the Deiri also, where he was wont
often to be with the king, he baptized in the river Swale,
which runs by the village of Cataract;<note place='foot'>Catterick Bridge (the Roman station Cataractonium, on the
Watling Street), near Richmond in the North Riding of Yorkshire.</note> for as yet oratories,
or baptisteries, could not be built in the early
infancy of the Church in those parts. But in Campodonum,<note place='foot'>Perhaps Doncaster. Other suggestions are Slack, near Huddersfield,
and Tanfield, near Ripon. The Anglo-Saxon version has
Donafeld.</note>
where there was then a royal township, he built
a church which the pagans, by whom King Edwin was
slain, afterwards burnt, together with all the place.
Instead of this royal seat the later kings built themselves
a township in the country called Loidis.<note place='foot'>Leeds. The royal township (<foreign rend='italic'>villa</foreign>) is said to have been at
Oswinthorp.</note> But the altar,
being of stone, escaped the fire and is still preserved in
the monastery of the most reverend abbot and priest,
Thrydwulf, which is in the forest of Elmet.<note place='foot'>Elmet Wood, near Leeds.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_II_Chap_XV'/>
<head>Chap. XV. How the province of the East Angles received
the faith of Christ. [627-628 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Edwin was so zealous for the true worship, that he likewise
persuaded Earpwald, king of the East Angles, and
son of Redwald, to abandon his idolatrous superstitions,
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
and with his whole province to receive the faith and
mysteries of Christ. And indeed his father Redwald had
long before been initiated into the mysteries of the
Christian faith in Kent, but in vain; for on his return
home, he was seduced by his wife and certain perverse
teachers, and turned aside from the sincerity of the faith;
and thus his latter state was worse than the former; so
that, like the Samaritans of old, he seemed at the same
time to serve Christ and the gods whom he served
before; and in the same temple he had an altar for the
Christian Sacrifice, and another small one at which to
offer victims to devils. Aldwulf,<note place='foot'>Cf. IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVII'>17</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>. His father was Ethelhere, King of East
Anglia (<ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>III, 24</ref>).</note> king of that same province,
who lived in our time, testifies that this temple
had stood until his time, and that he had seen it when
he was a boy. The aforesaid King Redwald was noble
by birth, though ignoble in his actions, being the son of
Tytilus, whose father was Uuffa, from whom the kings
of the East Angles are called Uuffings.<note place='foot'>For the patronymic, cf. <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi> c. 5, p. <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>, and note.</note>
</p>

<p>
Earpwald, not long after he had embraced the Christian
faith, was slain by one Ricbert, a pagan; and from that
time the province was in error for three years, till Sigbert
succeeded to the kingdom,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XVIII'>III, 18</ref>. He was Earpwald's half-brother, and had been
driven into exile by his step-father, Redwald. Besides becoming
a Christian, he had acquired a taste for secular learning in the
ecclesiastical schools of Gaul.</note> brother to the same
Earpwald, a most Christian and learned man, who was
banished, and went to live in Gaul during his brother's
life, and was there initiated into the mysteries of the
faith, whereof he made it his business to cause all his
province to partake as soon as he came to the throne.
His exertions were nobly promoted by Bishop Felix,<note place='foot'>Cf. III, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XVIII'>18</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XX'>20</ref>. <q>An important feature of this mission, as it
was of the Kentish, was the combination of education with religion,
by means of a school such as Sigbert had seen abroad, and as by
this time existed at Canterbury in connection with the house of
SS. Peter and Paul</q> (Bright, p. 143). The name of Felix is preserved
in Felixstowe, on the coast of Suffolk, and in Feliskirk, a
Yorkshire village.</note>
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
who, coming to Honorius, the archbishop,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Infra</hi> cc. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XVI'>16</ref>, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XVIII'>18</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>et saep.</hi> He was a disciple of Pope Gregory,
<q>vir in rebus ecclesiasticis sublimiter institutus</q> (<ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>V, 19</ref>).</note> from the
parts of Burgundy, where he had been born and ordained,
and having told him what he desired, was sent
by him to preach the Word of life to the aforesaid nation
of the Angles. Nor were his good wishes in vain; for
the pious labourer in the spiritual field reaped therein a
great harvest of believers, delivering all that province
(according to the inner signification of his name) from
long iniquity and unhappiness, and bringing it to the
faith and works of righteousness, and the gifts of everlasting
happiness. He had the see of his bishopric appointed
him in the city Dommoc,<note place='foot'>Dunwich, on the coast of Suffolk, once an important town,
afterwards partially submerged. The diocese was divided into
two by Theodore, and both sees became extinct during the Danish
invasions. After various vicissitudes, the seat of the East Anglian
bishopric was established at Norwich. Cf. IV, 5, p. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, note 1.</note> and having presided
over the same province with pontifical authority seventeen
years, he ended his days there in peace.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_II_Chap_XVI'/>
<head>Chap. XVI. How Paulinus preached in the province of
Lindsey; and of the character of the reign of Edwin.
[<hi rend='italic'>Circ.</hi> 628 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Paulinus also preached the Word to the province of
Lindsey,<note place='foot'>Lindsey, the largest of the three divisions of Lincolnshire, was
at times Mercian, at times Northumbrian. At this time it appears
to have been dependent on Northumbria; cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>IV, 12</ref>, note.</note> which is the first on the south side of the river
Humber, stretching as far as the sea; and he first converted
to the Lord the reeve of the city of Lincoln,
whose name was Blaecca, with his whole house. He likewise
built, in that city, a stone church of beautiful workmanship;
the roof of which has either fallen through long
neglect, or been thrown down by enemies, but the walls
are still to be seen standing, and every year miraculous
cures are wrought in that place, for the benefit of those
who have faith to seek them. In that church, when
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
Justus had departed to Christ, Paulinus consecrated
Honorius bishop in his stead, as will be hereafter mentioned
in its proper place.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XVIII'>18</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi> The church which stands on the probable
site of this church is called St. Paul's. The name has been supposed
to be a corruption of <q>Paulinus.</q></note> A certain priest and abbot
of the monastery of Peartaneu,<note place='foot'>Partney, in Lincolnshire; afterwards it became a cell of Bardney
Abbey.</note> a man of singular veracity,
whose name was Deda, told me concerning the
faith of this province that an old man had informed
him that he himself had been baptized at noon-day, by
Bishop Paulinus, in the presence of King Edwin, and
with him a great multitude of the people, in the river
Trent, near the city, which in the English tongue is
called Tiouulfingacaestir;<note place='foot'>The place cannot be identified with certainty. Torksey, Southwell,
Newark, Fiskerton, and Littleborough have all been suggested.</note> and he was also wont to
describe the person of the same Paulinus, saying that he
was tall of stature, stooping somewhat, his hair black,
his visage thin, his nose slender and aquiline, his aspect
both venerable and awe-inspiring. He had also with him
in the ministry, James, the deacon,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XX'>20</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi></note> a man of zeal and
great fame in Christ and in the church, who lived even
to our days.
</p>

<p>
It is told that there was then such perfect peace in
Britain, wheresoever the dominion of King Edwin extended,
that, as is still proverbially said, a woman with
her new-born babe might walk throughout the island,
from sea to sea, without receiving any harm. That king
took such care for the good of his nation, that in several
places where he had seen clear springs near the highways,
he caused stakes to be fixed, with copper drinking-vessels
hanging on them, for the refreshment of
travellers; nor durst any man touch them for any other
purpose than that for which they were designed, either
through the great dread they had of the king, or for the
affection which they bore him. His dignity was so great
throughout his dominions, that not only were his banners
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
borne before him in battle, but even in time of peace,
when he rode about his cities, townships, or provinces,
with his thegns, the standard-bearer was always wont to
go before him. Also, when he walked anywhere along
the streets, that sort of banner which the Romans call
Tufa,<note place='foot'>A form of standard adopted from the Romans. It was made of
feathers attached to a spear.</note> and the English, Thuuf, was in like manner borne
before him.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_II_Chap_XVII'/>
<head>Chap. XVII. How Edwin received letters of exhortation
from Pope Honorius, who also sent the pall to Paulinus.
[634 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
At that time Honorius, successor to Boniface, was Bishop
of the Apostolic see. When he learned that the nation of
the Northumbrians, with their king, had been, by the
preaching of Paulinus, converted to the faith and confession
of Christ, he sent the pall to the said Paulinus, and
with it letters of exhortation to King Edwin, with fatherly
love inflaming his zeal, to the end that he and his
people should persist in belief of the truth which they had
received. The contents of which letter were as follow:
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>To his most noble son, and excellent lord, Edwin king
of the Angles, Bishop Honorius, servant of the servants of
God, greeting.</hi> The wholeheartedness of your Christian
Majesty, in the worship of your Creator, is so inflamed
with the fire of faith, that it shines out far and wide,
and, being reported throughout the world, brings forth
plentiful fruits of your labours. For the terms of your
kingship you know to be this, that taught by orthodox
preaching the knowledge of your King and Creator, you
believe and worship God, and as far as man is able, pay
Him the sincere devotion of your mind. For what else
are we able to offer to our God, but our readiness to
worship Him and to pay Him our vows, persisting in good
actions, and confessing Him the Creator of mankind?
And, therefore, most excellent son, we exhort you with
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
such fatherly love as is meet, to labour to preserve this
gift in every way, by earnest striving and constant prayer,
in that the Divine Mercy has vouchsafed to call you to
His grace; to the end that He, Who has been pleased to
deliver you from all errors, and bring you to the knowledge
of His name in this present world, may likewise
prepare a place for you in the heavenly country. Employing
yourself, therefore, in reading frequently the
works of my lord Gregory, your Evangelist, of apostolic
memory, keep before your eyes that love of his doctrine,
which he zealously bestowed for the sake of your souls;
that his prayers may exalt your kingdom and people, and
present you faultless before Almighty God. We are preparing
with a willing mind immediately to grant those
things which you hoped would be by us ordained for
your bishops, and this we do on account of the sincerity
of your faith, which has been made known to us abundantly
in terms of praise by the bearers of these presents.
We have sent two palls to the two metropolitans,
Honorius and Paulinus;<note place='foot'>Cf. the instructions of Gregory: <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXIX'>I, 29</ref>.</note> to the intent, that when either
of them shall be called out of this world to his Creator,
the other may, by this authority of ours, substitute
another bishop in his place; which privilege we are
induced to grant by the warmth of our love for you, as
well as by reason of the great extent of the provinces
which lie between us and you; that we may in all things
support your devotion and likewise satisfy your desires.
May God's grace preserve your Highness in safety!</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_II_Chap_XVIII'/>
<head>Chap. XVIII. How Honorius, who succeeded Justus in
the bishopric of Canterbury, received the pall and letters
from Pope Honorius. [634 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the meantime, Archbishop Justus was taken up to the
heavenly kingdom, on the 10th of November,<note place='foot'>Bede does not mention the year of his death. The Saxon
Chronicle places it in 627, and this is supported by William of
Malmesbury. Smith places it in 630.</note> and
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
Honorius, who was elected to the see in his stead, came
to Paulinus to be ordained, and meeting him at Lincoln
was there consecrated the fifth prelate of the Church of
Canterbury from Augustine. To him also the aforesaid
Pope Honorius sent the pall, and a letter, wherein he
ordains the same that he had before ordained in his
epistle to King Edwin, to wit, that when either the
Archbishop of Canterbury or of York shall depart this
life, the survivor, being of the same degree, shall have
power to ordain another bishop in the room of him that
is departed; that it might not be necessary always to
undertake the toilsome journey to Rome, at so great a
distance by sea and land, to ordain an archbishop.
Which letter we have also thought fit to insert in this
our history:
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Honorius to his most beloved brother Honorius:</hi> Among
the many good gifts which the mercy of our Redeemer is
pleased to bestow on His servants He grants to us in
His bounty, graciously conferred on us by His goodness,
the special blessing of realizing by brotherly intercourse,
as it were face to face, our mutual love. For which gift
we continually render thanks to His Majesty; and we
humbly beseech Him, that He will ever confirm your
labour, beloved, in preaching the Gospel, and bringing
forth fruit, and following the rule of your master and
head, the holy Gregory; and that, for the advancement
of His Church, He may by your means raise up further
increase; to the end, that through faith and works, in
the fear and love of God, what you and your predecessors
have already gained from the seed sown by our lord
Gregory, may grow strong and be further extended; that
so the promises spoken by our Lord may hereafter be
brought to pass in you; and that these words may summon
you to everlasting happiness: <q>Come unto Me all
ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will refresh
you.</q><note place='foot'>St. Matt., xi, 28.</note> And again, <q>Well done, good and faithful servant;
thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make
thee ruler over many things; enter thou into the joy of
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
thy Lord.</q><note place='foot'>St. Matt., xxv, 21.</note> And we, most beloved brothers, sending you
first these words of exhortation out of our enduring
charity, do not fail further to grant those things which
we perceive may be suitable for the privileges of your
Churches.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Wherefore, in accordance with your request, and
that of the kings our sons,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, the kings of Northumbria and Kent. For similar combined
action on the part of a Northumbrian and a Kentish king, cf.
<ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIX'>III, 29</ref>.</note> we do hereby in the name
of the blessed Peter, chief of the Apostles, grant you
authority, that when the Divine Grace shall call either
of you to Himself, the survivor shall ordain a bishop in
the room of him that is deceased. To which end also we
have sent a pall to each of you, beloved, for celebrating
the said ordination; that by the authority which we
hereby commit to you, you may make an ordination
acceptable to God; because the long distance of sea and
land that lies between us and you, has obliged us to grant
you this, that no loss may happen to your Church in any
way, on any pretext whatever, but that the devotion of the
people committed to you may increase the more. God preserve
you in safety, most dear brother! Given the 11th
day of June, in the reign of these our lords and emperors,
in the twenty-fourth year of the reign of Heraclius, and
the twenty-third after his consulship; and in the twenty-third
of his son Constantine, and the third after his
consulship; and in the third year of the most prosperous
Caesar, his son Heraclius,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, Heracleonas, son of Heraclius and half-brother of Constantine
III; associated with them in the Empire.</note> the seventh indiction; that
is, in the year of our Lord, 634.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_II_Chap_XIX'/>
<head>Chap. XIX. How the aforesaid Honorius first, and
afterwards John, wrote letters to the nation of the Scots,
concerning the observance of Easter, and the Pelagian
heresy. [640 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
The same Pope Honorius also wrote to the Scots,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, Irish. For their error with regard to Easter, <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_IV'>4</ref>.</note> whom
he had found to err in the observance of the holy Festival
of Easter, as has been shown above, with subtlety of
argument exhorting them not to think themselves, few
as they were, and placed in the utmost borders of the
earth, wiser than all the ancient and modern Churches of
Christ, throughout the world; and not to celebrate a
different Easter, contrary to the Paschal calculation and
the decrees of all the bishops upon earth sitting in synod.
Likewise John,<note place='foot'>John IV, consecrated December 25th, 640. Severinus was
Pope for a few months only. Apparently (cf. <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>) the Irish
ecclesiastics had consulted him about the Easter question.</note> who succeeded Severinus, successor to
the same Honorius, being yet but Pope elect, sent to them
letters of great authority and erudition for the purpose of
correcting the same error; evidently showing, that Easter
Sunday is to be found between the fifteenth of the moon
and the twenty-first, as was approved in the Council of
Nicaea.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi> c. 2, p. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, note. On the Paschal question the Council
of Nicaea passed no canon, but the understanding was established
that <q>all the brethren in the East, who formerly celebrated Easter
with the Jews, will henceforth keep it agreeably with the Romans
and ourselves and all who from ancient time have kept Easter as
we</q>; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, that they should all keep Easter on the first day of the
week, but never on the 14th of the month Nisan, even when it fell
on a Sunday. The object of the rule was to avoid the day of the
Jewish Passover.</note> He also in the same epistle admonished them
to guard against the Pelagian heresy,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_X'>I, 10</ref>, note.</note> and reject it, for
he had been informed that it was again springing up
among them. The beginning of the epistle was as
follows:
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>To our most beloved and most holy Tomianus, Columbanus,
Cromanus, Dinnaus, and Baithanus, bishops; to
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
Cromanus, Ernianus, Laistranus, Scellanus, and Segenus,
priests; to Saranus and the rest of the Scottish doctors and
abbots, Hilarus, the arch-presbyter, and vice-gerent of the
holy Apostolic See; John, the deacon, and elect in the name
of God; likewise John, the chief of the notaries and vice-gerent
of the holy Apostolic See, and John, the servant of God,
and counsellor of the same Apostolic See.</hi><note place='foot'>These bishops have been identified as follows: Tomianus is
Tomene, Abbot and Bishop of Armagh; Columbanus is Colman,
Abbot of Clonard (also a bishop); Cromanus is Cronan, Bishop of
Nendrum, or Inishmahee; Dinnaus is probably Dima, Bishop of
Connor; Baithanus has not been identified with any certainty.
With regard to the priests the proposed identifications are more
conjectural. Saranus is a certain Saran Ua Critain. Two vice-gerents
of the Papal see are associated with the Pope elect in
writing this letter. The arch-presbyter and the <q>primicerius
notariorum,</q> with the archdeacon, acted as vice-gerents during a
vacancy, or in the absence of the Pope (cf. Plummer <hi rend='italic'>ad loc.</hi>).</note> The writings
which were brought by the bearers to Pope Severinus,
of holy memory, were left, when he departed from the
light of this world, without an answer to the questions
contained in them. Lest any obscurity should long remain
undispelled in a matter of so great moment, we opened
the same, and found that some in your province, endeavouring
to revive a new heresy out of an old one,
contrary to the orthodox faith, do through the darkness
of their minds reject our Easter, when Christ was sacrificed;
and contend that the same should be kept with the
Hebrews on the fourteenth of the moon.</q><note place='foot'>This is not fairly stated. The Irish were not <q>Quartodecimans,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, did not insist on the celebration of Easter being on the
fourteenth of the moon. They only included that day as a possible
one for Easter (cf. <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi> c. 2, p. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, note 3).</note>
</p>

<p>
By this beginning of the epistle it evidently appears
that this heresy arose among them in very late times,
and that not all their nation, but only some of them,
were involved in the same.
</p>

<p>
After having laid down the manner of keeping Easter,
they add this concerning the Pelagians in the same
epistle:
</p>

<p>
<q>And we have also learnt that the poison of the
Pelagian heresy again springs up among you; we,
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
therefore, exhort you, that you put away from your
thoughts all such venomous and superstitious wickedness.
For you cannot be ignorant how that execrable
heresy has been condemned; for it has not only been
abolished these two hundred years, but it is also daily
condemned by us and buried under our perpetual ban;
and we exhort you not to rake up the ashes of those
whose weapons have been burnt. For who would not
detest that insolent and impious assertion, <q>That man
can live without sin of his own free will, and not through
the grace of God?</q> And in the first place, it is blasphemous
folly to say that man is without sin, which none
can be, but only the one Mediator between God and men,
the Man Christ Jesus, Who was conceived and born without
sin; for all other men, being born in original sin,
are known to bear the mark of Adam's transgression,
even whilst they are without actual sin, according to the
saying of the prophet, <q>For behold, I was conceived in
iniquity; and in sin did my mother give birth to me.</q></q><note place='foot'>Ps. li, 5, in our Psalter. The quotation is partly from the Vulgate,
partly from the <q>Roman</q> Psalter, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, Jerome's revision of
the old Italic version.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_II_Chap_XX'/>
<head>Chap. XX. How Edwin being slain, Paulinus returned
into Kent, and had the bishopric of Rochester conferred
upon him. [633 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Edwin reigned most gloriously seventeen years over the
nations of the English and the Britons, six whereof, as
has been said, he also was a soldier in the kingdom of
Christ. Caedwalla,<note place='foot'>Or Cadwallon, King of Gwynedd, in North Wales. His father
Cadvan, had sheltered Edwin during his exile. Afterwards, when
Cadwallon invaded Northumbria, Edwin defeated him and drove
him from his kingdom. Having regained it, Cadwallon now allied
himself with Penda, king of the Mercians (626- or 627-655) in a
successful attempt to shake off the Northumbrian supremacy.</note> king of the Britons, rebelled against
him, being supported by the vigorous Penda, of the
royal race of the Mercians, who from that time governed
that nation for twenty-two years with varying success.
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
A great battle being fought in the plain that is called
Haethfelth,<note place='foot'>Generally identified with Hatfield Chase, north-east of Doncaster.</note> Edwin was killed on the 12th of October, in
the year of our Lord 633, being then forty-eight years of
age, and all his army was either slain or dispersed. In
the same war also, Osfrid,<note place='foot'>C. 14, p. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>.</note> one of his sons, a warlike
youth, fell before him; Eadfrid,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note> another of them, compelled
by necessity, went over to King Penda, and was
by him afterwards slain in the reign of Oswald, contrary
to his oath. At this time a great slaughter was made in
the Church and nation of the Northumbrians; chiefly
because one of the chiefs, by whom it was carried
on, was a pagan, and the other a barbarian, more cruel
than a pagan; for Penda, with all the nation of the
Mercians, was an idolater, and a stranger to the name of
Christ; but Caedwalla, though he professed and called
himself a Christian, was so barbarous in his disposition
and manner of living, that he did not even spare women
and innocent children, but with bestial cruelty put all
alike to death by torture, and overran all their country
in his fury for a long time, intending to cut off all the
race of the English within the borders of Britain. Nor
did he pay any respect to the Christian religion which
had sprung up among them; it being to this day the
custom of the Britons to despise the faith and religion of
the English, and to have no part with them in anything
any more than with pagans. King Edwin's head was
brought to York, and afterwards taken into the church of
the blessed Peter the Apostle, which he had begun, but
which his successor Oswald finished, as has been said
before. It was laid in the chapel of the holy Pope Gregory,
from whose disciples he had received the word of life.<note place='foot'>His body was ultimately buried at Whitby; cf. III, 24, p. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>,
and note.</note>
</p>

<p>
The affairs of the Northumbrians being thrown into
confusion at the moment of this disaster, when there
seemed to be no prospect of safety except in flight,
Paulinus, taking with him Queen Ethelberg, whom he
had before brought thither, returned into Kent by sea,
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
and was very honourably received by the Archbishop
Honorius and King Eadbald. He came thither under the
conduct of Bassus, a most valiant thegn of King Edwin,
having with him Eanfled, the daughter, and Wuscfrea,
the son of Edwin, as well as Yffi, the son of Osfrid,
Edwin's son.<note place='foot'>For Eanfled, <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_IX'>9</ref>. For Yffi and Wuscfrea, c. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XIV'>14</ref>.</note> Afterwards Ethelberg, for fear of the
kings Eadbald and Oswald,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_V'>5</ref>.</note> sent Wuscfrea and Yffi over
into Gaul to be bred up by King Dagobert,<note place='foot'>He was a kinsman. Ethelberg's mother, Bertha, was a
daughter of Charibert, King of Paris (cf. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXV'>I, 25</ref>, note). His brother,
Chilperic, was Dagobert's grandfather.</note> who was
her friend; and there they both died in infancy, and
were buried in the church with the honour due to royal
children and to Christ's innocents. He also brought with
him many rich goods of King Edwin, among which were
a large gold cross, and a golden chalice, consecrated to
the service of the altar, which are still preserved, and
shown in the church of Canterbury.
</p>

<p>
At that time the church of Rochester had no pastor,
for Romanus,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_VIII'>8</ref>.</note> the bishop thereof, being sent on a
mission to Pope Honorius by Archbishop Justus, was
drowned in the Italian Sea; and thus Paulinus, at the
request of Archbishop Honorius and King Eadbald, took
upon him the charge of the same, and held it until he
too, in his own time, departed to heaven, with the fruits
of his glorious labours; and, dying in that Church, he left
there the pall which he had received from the Pope of
Rome. He had left behind him in his Church at York,
James, the deacon,<note place='foot'>C. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XVI'>16</ref>, and <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXV'>III, 25</ref>.</note> a true churchman and a holy man,
who continuing long after in that Church, by teaching
and baptizing, rescued much prey from the ancient
enemy; and from him the village, where he chiefly dwelt,
near Cataract,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XIV'>14</ref>. The village cannot be identified. Akeburgh has
been suggested, the name being regarded as a corruption of
<q>Jacobsburgh.</q></note> has its name to this day. He had great
skill in singing in church, and when the province was
afterwards restored to peace, and the number of the
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
faithful increased, he began to teach church music to
many, according to the custom of the Romans, or of the
Cantuarians.<note place='foot'>The <q>Cantus Romanus,</q> brought to England by the Roman
mission; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the style of Church music according to the use of
Rome. The theory that Gregory the Great was the founder of
Gregorian music, which superseded the old <q>Cantus Ambrosianus</q>
everywhere in the West except at Milan, must in all probability be
abandoned. It seems to be established that no change of any importance
was made till nearly a hundred years after Gregory's
time, and <q>the terms <q>Gregorianus,</q> <q>Ambrosianus Cantus,</q> probably
mean nothing more than the style of singing according to the
respective uses of Rome and Milan.</q> (F. Homes Dudden, <q>Gregory
the Great,</q> I, p. 274.)</note> And being old and full of days, as the
Scripture says, he went the way of his fathers.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Book III</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_I'/>
<head>Chap. I. How King Edwin's next successors lost both the
faith of their nation and the kingdom; but the most
Christian King Oswald retrieved both. [633 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Edwin being slain in battle, the kingdom of the Deiri,
to which province his family belonged, and where he first
began to reign, passed to Osric, the son of his uncle
Aelfric, who, through the preaching of Paulinus, had also
received the mysteries of the faith. But the kingdom of
the Bernicians&mdash;for into these two provinces the nation
of the Northumbrians was formerly divided<note place='foot'>Cf. II, 1, p. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, note.</note>&mdash;passed to
Eanfrid, the son of Ethelfrid,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXXIV'>I, 34</ref>; II, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_II'>2</ref>, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XII'>12</ref>.</note> who derived his origin from
the royal family of that province. For all the time that
Edwin reigned, the sons of the aforesaid Ethelfrid, who
had reigned before him, with many of the younger
nobility, lived in banishment among the Scots or Picts,
and were there instructed according to the doctrine of the
Scots, and were renewed with the grace of Baptism.
Upon the death of the king, their enemy, they were
allowed to return home, and the aforesaid Eanfrid, as
the eldest of them, became king of the Bernicians. Both
those kings,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, Osric and Eanfrid.</note> as soon as they obtained the government of
their earthly kingdoms, abjured and betrayed the mysteries
of the heavenly kingdom to which they had been
admitted, and again delivered themselves up to defilement
and perdition through the abominations of their
former idolatry.
</p>

<p>
But soon after, the king of the Britons, Caedwalla,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XX'>II, 20</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi></note> the
unrighteous instrument of rightful vengeance, slew them
both. First, in the following summer, he put Osric to
death; for, being rashly besieged by him in the municipal
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
town,<note place='foot'><q>In oppido municipio.</q> Commentators are agreed that Bede
means York. It was a Roman <q>Colonia,</q> and is called a <q>municipium</q>
by Aurelius Victor, though whether Bede attaches any
definitely Roman meaning to the term seems doubtful. Ducange
explains <q>municipium</q> as <q>castrum,</q> <q>castellum muris cinctum.</q></note> he sallied out on a sudden with all his forces, took
him by surprise, and destroyed him and all his army.
Then, when he had occupied the provinces of the Northumbrians
for a whole year,<note place='foot'>From the death of Edwin (October 12th, 633), for Oswald's
reign is reckoned as lasting nine years, including the <q>hateful
year,</q> and he was killed August 5th, 642. Cf. <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_IX'>9</ref>.</note> not ruling them like a victorious
king, but ravaging them like a furious tyrant, he at length
put an end to Eanfrid, in like manner, when he unadvisedly
came to him with only twelve chosen soldiers, to
sue for peace. To this day, that year is looked upon as ill-omened,
and hateful to all good men; as well on account
of the apostacy of the English kings, who had renounced
the mysteries of the faith, as of the outrageous tyranny
of the British king. Hence it has been generally agreed,
in reckoning the dates of the kings, to abolish the memory
of those faithless monarchs, and to assign that year to
the reign of the following king, Oswald, a man beloved
of God. This king, after the death of his brother Eanfrid,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, probably before the end of 634.</note>
advanced with an army, small, indeed, in number,
but strengthened with the faith of Christ; and the impious
commander of the Britons, in spite of his vast
forces, which he boasted nothing could withstand, was
slain at a place called in the English tongue Denisesburna,
that is, the brook of Denis.<note place='foot'>Not identified with any certainty, but probably the Rowley
Water or a tributary of it. It cannot be, as has been suggested,
the Devil's Water, which is clearly distinguished from it in a
charter of the thirteenth century. Caedwalla must have fled southwards
for eight or nine miles after the battle (cf. next note).</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. II. How, among innumerable other miracles of
healing wrought by the wood of the cross, which King
Oswald, being ready to engage against the barbarians,
erected, a certain man had his injured arm healed.
[634 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
The place is shown to this day, and held in much veneration,
where Oswald, being about to engage in this battle,
erected the symbol of the Holy Cross, and knelt down and
prayed to God that he would send help from Heaven to
his worshippers in their sore need. Then, we are told,
that the cross being made in haste, and the hole dug in
which it was to be set up, the king himself, in the ardour
of his faith, laid hold of it and held it upright with both
his hands, till the earth was heaped up by the soldiers
and it was fixed. Thereupon, uplifting his voice, he cried
to his whole army, <q>Let us all kneel, and together beseech
the true and living God Almighty in His mercy to defend
us from the proud and cruel enemy; for He knows that
we have undertaken a just war for the safety of our
nation.</q> All did as he had commanded, and accordingly
advancing towards the enemy with the first dawn of day,
they obtained the victory, as their faith deserved. In the
place where they prayed very many miracles of healing
are known to have been wrought, as a token and
memorial of the king's faith; for even to this day, many
are wont to cut off small splinters from the wood of the
holy cross, and put them into water, which they give to
sick men or cattle to drink, or they sprinkle them therewith,
and these are presently restored to health.
</p>

<p>
The place is called in the English tongue Hefenfelth,
or the Heavenly Field,<note place='foot'>For another instance of a name with an inner meaning, cf. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XV'>II,
15</ref>. The site of the battle is probably seven or eight miles north of
Hexham (v. next note), Oswald having taken up his position on
the northern side of the Roman wall between the Tyne and the
Solway (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the wall attributed to Hadrian, cf. I, 12, p. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, note).
According to tradition the battle was finally won at a place called
Halydene (Hallington?), two miles to the east.</note> which name it undoubtedly received
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
of old as a presage of what was afterwards to
happen, denoting, that the heavenly trophy was to be
erected, the heavenly victory begun, and heavenly
miracles shown forth to this day. The place is near the
wall in the north which the Romans formerly drew
across the whole of Britain from sea to sea, to restrain
the onslaught of the barbarous nations, as has been
said before. Hither also the brothers of the church of
Hagustald,<note place='foot'>Hexham. Wilfrid built a magnificent church there between
the years 672-678 on land given by Ethelthryth, wife of Egfrid,
king of Northumbria. It became the see of a bishop in 678 when
the great northern diocese was subdivided by Theodore (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>IV,
12</ref>). Bede's own monastery of Wearmouth and Jarrow was in the
diocese of Hexham. The bishopric became extinct in 821.</note> which is not far distant, long ago made it
their custom to resort every year, on the day before that
on which King Oswald was afterwards slain, to keep
vigils there for the health of his soul, and having sung
many psalms of praise, to offer for him in the morning
the sacrifice of the Holy Oblation. And since that good
custom has spread, they have lately built a church there,
which has attached additional sanctity and honour in the
eyes of all men to that place;<note place='foot'>The place is still called St. Oswald's, and a little chapel probably
marks the spot.</note> and this with good
reason; for it appears that there was no symbol of the
Christian faith, no church, no altar erected throughout
all the nation of the Bernicians, before that new leader
in war, prompted by the zeal of his faith, set up this
standard of the Cross as he was going to give battle to
his barbarous enemy.
</p>

<p>
Nor is it foreign to our purpose to relate one of the
many miracles that have been wrought at this cross.
One of the brothers of the same church of Hagulstald,
whose name is Bothelm, and who is still living, a few
years ago, walking carelessly on the ice at night,
suddenly fell and broke his arm; he was soon tormented
with a most grievous pain in the broken part, so that he
could not lift his arm to his mouth for the anguish. Hearing
one morning that one of the brothers designed to go
up to the place of the holy cross, he desired him, on his
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
return, to bring him a piece of that sacred wood, saying,
he believed that with the mercy of God he might thereby
be healed. The brother did as he was desired; and returning
in the evening, when the brothers were sitting at
table, gave him some of the old moss which grew on the
surface of the wood. As he sat at table, having no place
to bestow the gift which was brought him, he put it into
his bosom; and forgetting, when he went to bed, to put
it away, left it in his bosom. Awaking in the middle of
the night, he felt something cold lying by his side, and
putting his hand upon it to feel what it was, he found
his arm and hand as sound as if he had never felt any
such pain.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_III'/>
<head>Chap. III. How the same king Oswald, asking a bishop
of the Scottish nation, had Aidan sent him, and granted
him an episcopal see in the Isle of Lindisfarne. [635
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
The same Oswald, as soon as he ascended the throne,
being desirous that all the nation under his rule should
be endued with the grace of the Christian faith, whereof
he had found happy experience in vanquishing the barbarians,
sent to the elders of the Scots,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, Irish.</note> among whom
himself and his followers, when in banishment, had received
the sacrament of Baptism, desiring that they would
send him a bishop, by whose instruction and ministry the
English nation, which he governed, might learn the
privileges and receive the Sacraments of the faith of our
Lord. Nor were they slow in granting his request; for
they sent him Bishop Aidan, a man of singular gentleness,
piety, and moderation; having a zeal of God, but
not fully according to knowledge; for he was wont to
keep Easter Sunday according to the custom of his
country, which we have before so often mentioned,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_II'>II, 2</ref>, note on Paschal Controversy.</note> from
the fourteenth to the twentieth of the moon; the northern
province of the Scots, and all the nation of the Picts, at
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
that time still celebrating Easter after that manner, and
believing that in this observance they followed the
writings of the holy and praiseworthy Father Anatolius.<note place='foot'>Bishop of Laodicea, <hi rend='italic'>circ.</hi> 284 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> According to Eusebius, he
was the first to arrange the cycle of nineteen years. The Canon
quoted by the Celts in support of their observance of Easter is
proved to be a forgery, probably of the seventh century and of
British origin.</note>
Whether this be true, every instructed person can easily
judge. But the Scots which dwelt in the South of Ireland
had long since, by the admonition of the Bishop of the
Apostolic see, learned to observe Easter according to
the canonical custom.<note place='foot'>Probably they adopted Catholic customs about 633, after the
return of their delegates sent to consult the Roman Church on this
question in 631.</note>
</p>

<p>
On the arrival of the bishop, the king appointed him
his episcopal see in the island of Lindisfarne,<note place='foot'>Cf. Preface, p. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, note 3. The Celtic missionaries were generally
attracted to remote sites, and this, the first mission station of
the Celtic Church in Northumbria, was doubtless chosen for the
resemblance of its physical features to Iona. The constitution was
also modelled on that of Iona, with this difference, that it was an
episcopal see as well as a monastery. It was included in the
<q>province</q> of the Abbot of Iona. The Bishop and all the clergy
were monks, and Aidan himself was Abbot as well as Bishop.</note> as he
desired. Which place, as the tide ebbs and flows, is
twice a day enclosed by the waves of the sea like an
island; and again, twice, when the beach is left dry,
becomes contiguous with the land. The king also humbly
and willingly in all things giving ear to his admonitions,
industriously applied himself to build up and extend the
Church of Christ in his kingdom; wherein, when the
bishop, who was not perfectly skilled in the English
tongue, preached the Gospel, it was a fair sight to see
the king himself interpreting the Word of God to his
ealdormen and thegns, for he had thoroughly learned the
language of the Scots during his long banishment. From
that time many came daily into Britain from the country
of the Scots, and with great devotion preached the Word
to those provinces of the English, over which King
Oswald reigned, and those among them that had received
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
priest's orders,<note place='foot'><q>Sacerdotali,</q> perhaps (but not necessarily here) = <q>episcopal,</q>
as often. There may have been a number of the Irish
non-diocesan bishops in the mission.</note> administered the grace of Baptism
to the believers. Churches were built in divers places;
the people joyfully flocked together to hear the Word;
lands and other property were given of the king's bounty
to found monasteries; English children, as well as their
elders, were instructed by their Scottish teachers in study
and the observance of monastic discipline. For most of
those who came to preach were monks. Bishop Aidan
was himself a monk, having been sent out from the
island called Hii,<note place='foot'>Iona, a name supposed to have arisen from a mistaken reading
of <foreign rend='italic'>Ioua</foreign>, an adjectival form used by Adamnan (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi> note 4),
feminine, agreeing with <foreign rend='italic'>insula</foreign>, formed from the Irish name, I, Ii,
Hii, etc. (the forms vary greatly). Then <q>Iona</q> was fancifully
regarded as the Hebrew equivalent for <foreign rend='italic'>Columba</foreign> (= a dove), and
this helped to preserve the name.</note> whereof the monastery was for a long
time the chief of almost all those of the northern Scots,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, Irish.</note>
and all those of the Picts, and had the direction of their
people. That island belongs to Britain, being divided
from it by a small arm of the sea, but had been long
since given by the Picts, who inhabit those parts of
Britain, to the Scottish monks, because they had received
the faith of Christ through their preaching.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_IV'/>
<head>Chap. IV. When the nation of the Picts received the
faith of Christ. [565 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 565, when Justin, the younger,
the successor of Justinian, obtained the government of
the Roman empire, there came into Britain from Ireland
a famous priest and abbot, marked as a monk by habit
and manner of life, whose name was Columba,<note place='foot'>For St. Columba, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Dr. Reeves's edition of the life by Adamnan,
Abbot of Iona, 679-704 (cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XV'>V, 15</ref>, note). Authorities are
divided with regard to the date of his coming to Britain. Dr.
Reeves and Mr. Skene, following the Annals of Tighernach,
decide in favour of 563. For his name, <q>Columcille,</q> cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_IX'>V, 9</ref>,
note. He was of Irish birth, connected with the Dalriadic Scots,
and of royal descent on both sides of his house. He was ordained
priest at Clonard, but was never a bishop. Many ecclesiastical
and monastic foundations throughout Ireland and Scotland are
attributed to him. He travelled much in both countries, visited
Bruide (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi>) at Inverness, and founded churches all over the
north of Scotland. He also worked indefatigably in his own monastery
of Iona. In his earlier years his excitable, impatient temperament
seems to have involved him in various wars. He is said
to have stirred up his kinsmen against the Irish king, Diarmaid;
and it has been supposed that his mission to the Picts was undertaken
in expiation of the bloodshed for which he was responsible.</note> to
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
preach the word of God to the provinces of the northern
Picts, who are separated from the southern parts belonging
to that nation by steep and rugged mountains. For
the southern Picts, who dwell on this side of those
mountains, had, it is said, long before forsaken the
errors of idolatry, and received the true faith by the
preaching of Bishop Ninias,<note place='foot'>There is much that is legendary in the account of St. Ninias,
and Bede only professes to give the tradition. He was a Briton,
probably a native of Strathclyde. He studied at Rome and received
episcopal consecration there; came under the influence of
St. Martin of Tours, to whom he afterwards dedicated his church
in Galloway, and returned as a missionary to Britain. His preaching
led to the conversion of the Picts of Galloway and those to
whom Bede alludes here as situated to the south of the Grampians.
Irish tradition, difficult to reconcile with Bede's statement that he
was buried at Whitern, tells that he spent the last years of his life
in Ireland and founded a church at Leinster. He was commemorated
there on September 16th, under the name of Moinenn. The
traditional date of his death, September 16th, 432, has no authority.</note> a most reverend and holy
man of the British nation, who had been regularly instructed
at Rome in the faith and mysteries of the
truth; whose episcopal see, named after St. Martin the
bishop, and famous for a church dedicated to him
(wherein Ninias himself and many other saints rest in
the body), is now in the possession of the English nation.
The place belongs to the province of the Bernicians, and
is commonly called the White House,<note place='foot'>Whitern, on Wigton Bay, so called from the white appearance
of the stone church, as compared with the usual wooden buildings.
The dedication must have been subsequent to St. Martin's death,
<hi rend='italic'>circ.</hi> 397. The see was revived as an Anglian one in Bede's own
time (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> V. 23, p. <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>). For the form of the name, <q>Ad Candidam
Casam,</q> cf. II, 14, p. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, note 5.</note> because he there
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
built a church of stone, which was not usual among the
Britons.
</p>

<p>
Columba came into Britain in the ninth year of the
reign of Bridius, who was the son of Meilochon,<note place='foot'>Bruide Mac Maelchon had defeated the Dalriadic Scots in
560 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> and driven them back to Cantyre. Northwards his
dominion extended as far as the Orkneys and it is probable that
it included the eastern lowlands north of the Forth (cf. Rhŷs,
<q>Celtic Britain</q>). Another tradition (Irish) represents Conall,
King of the Dalriadic Scots, as the donor of Iona, but the earliest
Irish authority (ninth or tenth century) agrees with Bede.</note> and
the powerful king of the Pictish nation, and he converted
that nation to the faith of Christ, by his preaching and
example. Wherefore he also received of them the gift of
the aforesaid island whereon to found a monastery. It is
not a large island, but contains about five families,
according to the English computation; his successors
hold it to this day; he was also buried therein, having
died at the age of seventy-seven, about thirty-two years
after he came into Britain to preach.<note place='foot'>The year in which he died, as well as the ultimate resting-place
of his relics, is uncertain. Dr. Reeves places his death in
597, the year of St. Augustine's landing.</note> Before he crossed
over into Britain, he had built a famous monastery in
Ireland, which, from the great number of oaks, is in the
Scottish tongue called Dearmach&mdash;The Field of Oaks.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, in Irish. The place is Durrow in Leinster.</note>
From both these monasteries, many others had their
beginning through his disciples, both in Britain and
Ireland; but the island monastery where his body lies,
has the pre-eminence among them all.
</p>

<p>
That island has for its ruler an abbot, who is a priest,
to whose jurisdiction all the province, and even the
bishops, contrary to the usual method, are bound to be
subject, according to the example of their first teacher,
who was not a bishop, but a priest and monk;<note place='foot'>There was no diocesan episcopate in the early Irish Church;
it was organized on a monastic system. Bishops performed all
episcopal functions (ordination, etc.), but they lived in the monastery,
subject to the supreme authority of the abbot, who was aided in
the government by a council of senior monks. Bishops were also
sent out as missionaries. The functions of abbot and bishop might
be combined in one man, but the abbot, as such, could discharge no
episcopal duties. A great monastery was head of a <q>provincia</q>
(<q>diocesis,</q> <q>parochia</q>), and had many monasteries and churches
dependent on it.</note> of whose
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
life and discourses some records are said to be preserved
by his disciples. But whatsoever he was himself, this we
know for certain concerning him, that he left successors
renowned for their continence, their love of God, and
observance of monastic rules. It is true they employed
doubtful cycles in fixing the time of the great festival,
as having none to bring them the synodal decrees for
the observance of Easter, by reason of their being so far
away from the rest of the world; but they earnestly
practised such works of piety and chastity as they could
learn from the Prophets, the Gospels and the Apostolic
writings. This manner of keeping Easter continued
among them no little time, to wit, for the space of 150
years, till the year of our Lord 715.
</p>

<p>
But then the most reverend and holy father and priest,
Egbert,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVII'>27</ref>, IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_III'>3</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVI'>26</ref>; V, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_IX'>9</ref>, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_X'>10</ref>, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXII'>22</ref>, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>. Perhaps <q>sacerdos</q>
should be translated <q>bishop</q> here (<hi rend='italic'>v. supra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_III'>3</ref>, note; <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>
c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVII'>27</ref>, note). Early writers allude to him as a bishop, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Alcuin,
Ethelwulf. In the life of St. Adalbert, one of Wilbrord's companions
(cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_X'>V. 10</ref>), he is called <q>Northumbrorum episcopus.</q></note> of the English nation, who had long lived in
banishment in Ireland for the sake of Christ, and was
most learned in the Scriptures, and renowned for long
perfection of life, came among them, corrected their
error, and led them to observe the true and canonical
day of Easter; which, nevertheless, they did not always
keep on the fourteenth of the moon with the Jews, as
some imagined, but on Sunday, although not in the proper
week.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, they were not <q>Quartodecimans</q> (cf. II, 2, p. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, note 3).</note> For, as Christians, they knew that the Resurrection
of our Lord, which happened on the first day of the
week, was always to be celebrated on the first day of
the week; but being rude and barbarous, they had not
learned when that same first day after the Sabbath,
which is now called the Lord's day, should come. But
because they had not failed in the grace of fervent
charity, they were accounted worthy to receive the full
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
knowledge of this matter also, according to the promise
of the Apostle, <q>And if in any thing ye be otherwise
minded, God shall reveal even this unto you.</q><note place='foot'>Phil., iii, 15.</note> Of which
we shall speak more fully hereafter in its proper place.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. V. Of the life of Bishop Aidan. [635 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
From this island, then, and the fraternity of these monks,
Aidan was sent to instruct the English nation in Christ,
having received the dignity of a bishop. At that time
Segeni,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XIX'>II, 19</ref>. He is probably to be identified with the Segenus
mentioned there as one of the priests to whom Pope John's letter
was addressed. He was Abbot of Iona, 623-652.</note> abbot and priest, presided over that monastery.
Among other lessons in holy living, Aidan left the
clergy a most salutary example of abstinence and continence;
it was the highest commendation of his doctrine
with all men, that he taught nothing that he did not
practise in his life among his brethren; for he neither
sought nor loved anything of this world, but delighted
in distributing immediately among the poor whom he
met whatsoever was given him by the kings or rich men
of the world. He was wont to traverse both town and
country on foot, never on horseback, unless compelled
by some urgent necessity; to the end that, as he went,
he might turn aside to any whomsoever he saw, whether
rich or poor, and call upon them, if infidels, to receive
the mystery of the faith, or, if they were believers,
strengthen them in the faith, and stir them up by words
and actions to giving of alms and the performance of
good works.
</p>

<p>
His course of life was so different from the slothfulness
of our times, that all those who bore him company,
whether they were tonsured or laymen, had to study
either reading the Scriptures, or learning psalms. This
was the daily employment of himself and all that were
with him, wheresoever they went; and if it happened,
which was but seldom, that he was invited to the king's
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
table, he went with one or two clerks, and having taken
a little food, made haste to be gone, either to read with
his brethren or to pray. At that time, many religious
men and women, led by his example, adopted the custom
of prolonging their fast on Wednesdays and Fridays, till
the ninth hour, throughout the year, except during the
fifty days after Easter. Never, through fear or respect
of persons, did he keep silence with regard to the sins of
the rich; but was wont to correct them with a severe
rebuke. He never gave money to the powerful men of
the world, but only food, if he happened to entertain
them; and, on the contrary, whatsoever gifts of money
he received from the rich, he either distributed, as has
been said, for the use of the poor, or bestowed in ransoming
such as had been wrongfully sold for slaves.
Moreover, he afterwards made many of those he had
ransomed his disciples, and after having taught and
instructed them, advanced them to priest's orders.
</p>

<p>
It is said, that when King Oswald had asked a bishop
of the Scots to administer the Word of faith to him and
his nation, there was first sent to him another man of
more harsh disposition,<note place='foot'>Hector Boethius gives his name as Corman.</note> who, after preaching for some
time to the English and meeting with no success, not
being gladly heard by the people, returned home, and in
an assembly of the elders reported, that he had not been
able to do any good by his teaching to the nation to
whom he had been sent, because they were intractable
men, and of a stubborn and barbarous disposition. They
then, it is said, held a council and seriously debated
what was to be done, being desirous that the nation
should obtain the salvation it demanded, but grieving
that they had not received the preacher sent to them.
Then said Aidan, who was also present in the council,
to the priest in question, <q>Methinks, brother, that you
were more severe to your unlearned hearers than you
ought to have been, and did not at first, conformably to
the Apostolic rule, give them the milk of more easy
doctrine, till, being by degrees nourished with the Word
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
of God, they should be capable of receiving that which
is more perfect and of performing the higher precepts of
God.</q> Having heard these words, all present turned
their attention to him and began diligently to weigh
what he had said, and they decided that he was worthy
to be made a bishop, and that he was the man who
ought to be sent to instruct the unbelieving and unlearned;
since he was found to be endued preeminently
with the grace of discretion, which is the mother of the
virtues. So they ordained him and sent him forth to
preach; and, as time went on, his other virtues became
apparent, as well as that temperate discretion which
had marked him at first.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_VI'/>
<head>Chap. VI. Of King Oswald's wonderful piety and
religion. [635-642 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
King Oswald, with the English nation which he governed,
being instructed by the teaching of this bishop, not only
learned to hope for a heavenly kingdom unknown to his
fathers, but also obtained of the one God, Who made
heaven and earth, a greater earthly kingdom than any
of his ancestors. In brief, he brought under his dominion
all the nations and provinces of Britain, which are
divided into four languages, to wit, those of the Britons,
the Picts, the Scots, and the English.<note place='foot'>Cf. I, 1, p. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, note 2.</note> Though raised
to that height of regal power, wonderful to relate, he
was always humble, kind, and generous to the poor and
to strangers.
</p>

<p>
To give one instance, it is told, that when he was once
sitting at dinner, on the holy day of Easter, with the
aforesaid bishop, and a silver dish full of royal dainties
was set before him, and they were just about to put forth
their hands to bless the bread, the servant, whom he
had appointed to relieve the needy, came in on a sudden,
and told the king, that a great multitude of poor folk
from all parts was sitting in the streets begging alms of
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
the king; he immediately ordered the meat set before
him to be carried to the poor, and the dish to be broken
in pieces and divided among them. At which sight, the
bishop who sat by him, greatly rejoicing at such an act
of piety, clasped his right hand and said, <q>May this
hand never decay.</q> This fell out according to his prayer,
for his hands with the arms being cut off from his body,
when he was slain in battle, remain uncorrupted to this
day, and are kept in a silver shrine, as revered relics, in
St. Peter's church in the royal city,<note place='foot'>Bamborough (Bebbanburh, Bebburgh, Babbanburch, etc.
There are many forms of the name). It is uncertain who the
queen was. Nennius says she was the wife of Ethelfrid. His wife,
Oswald's mother, was Acha (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi>), but he may have been
married twice. It was Ida, the first king of Bernicia, who founded
Bamborough (Sax. Chron.).</note> which has taken its
name from Bebba, one of its former queens. Through
this king's exertions the provinces of the Deiri and the
Bernicians, which till then had been at variance, were
peacefully united and moulded into one people. He was
nephew to King Edwin through his sister Acha; and it
was fit that so great a predecessor should have in his
own family such an one to succeed him in his religion
and sovereignty.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_VII'/>
<head>Chap. VII. How the West Saxons received the Word of
God by the preaching of Birinus; and of his successors,
Agilbert and Leutherius. [635-670 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
At that time, the West Saxons, formerly called
Gewissae,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_V'>II, 5</ref> <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>, note.</note> in the reign of Cynegils,<note place='foot'>Cf. note on Cuichelm, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_IX'>II, 9</ref>. Cynegils began to reign in 611
and reigned about thirty-one years.</note> received the faith
of Christ, through the preaching of Bishop Birinus,<note place='foot'>This account tells us substantially all that is known of him.
Additional details are either legendary or conjectural. He was
made a missionary (<q>regionary</q>) bishop, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, had no fixed see
assigned to him.</note> who
came into Britain by the counsel of Pope Honorius;<note place='foot'>II, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XVII'>17</ref>, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XVIII'>18</ref>, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XIX'>19</ref>, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XX'>20</ref>.</note>
having promised in his presence that he would sow the
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
seed of the holy faith in the farthest inland regions of
the English, where no other teacher had been before
him. Hereupon at the bidding of the Pope he received
episcopal consecration from Asterius, bishop of Genoa;<note place='foot'>He was Archbishop of Milan, residing at Genoa. <q>Asterius
... like his predecessors from 568, avoided contact with the
dominant Arian Lombards by residing within the imperial territory
at Genoa</q> (Bright).</note>
but on his arrival in Britain, he first came to the nation
of the Gewissae, and finding all in that place confirmed
pagans, he thought it better to preach the Word there,
than to proceed further to seek for other hearers of his
preaching.
</p>

<p>
Now, as he was spreading the Gospel in the aforesaid
province, it happened that when the king himself, having
received instruction as a catechumen, was being baptized
together with his people, Oswald, the most holy
and victorious king of the Northumbrians, being present,
received him as he came forth from baptism, and by an
honourable alliance most acceptable to God, first adopted
as his son, thus born again and dedicated to God, the
man whose daughter<note place='foot'>Called Cyneburga by Reginald of Durham (Life of St. Oswald).</note> he was about to receive in
marriage. The two kings gave to the bishop the city
called Dorcic,<note place='foot'>Dorchester, about nine miles from Oxford, near the junction of
the Thame and the Thames. The Abbey Church of SS. Peter and
Paul stands on the traditional site of Cynegil's baptism. The see
became extinct on the retirement of Agilbert (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi>), but there
are some grounds for believing that it was revived for a short time
as a Mercian see in 679 (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> p. <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, note), after which it again disappeared
till, in the ninth century, the Bishop of Leicester moved
his see to Dorchester.</note> there to establish his episcopal see;
where having built and consecrated churches, and by his
pious labours called many to the Lord, he departed to
the Lord, and was buried in the same city; but many
years after, when Haedde was bishop,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>IV, 12</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>V, 18</ref>. Haedde became bishop in 676 (Sax. Chron.).
His see was at Winchester. He removed the bones of Birinus,
because Dorchester had ceased to be an episcopal see. Winchester
continued to be the only West Saxon see till the diocese
was again divided (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>V, 18</ref>), when Daniel was established at Winchester,
and Aldhelm at Sherborne.</note> he was translated
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
thence to the city of Venta,<note place='foot'>Winchester; <hi rend='italic'>Gwent</hi> (Celtic) = a plain. This, the <q>old Church,</q>
as distinguished from the present Cathedral, was built by Coinwalch
on his restoration to his kingdom. There are legends
of early British churches on the site, the first founded by <q>King
Lucius</q> (<ref target='Book_I_Chap_IV'>I, 4</ref>), the second dedicated to <q>St. Amphibalus</q> (I, 7,
p. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, note).</note> and laid in the church of
the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul.
</p>

<p>
When the king died, his son Coinwalch<note place='foot'>Cuichelm (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_II_Chap_IX'>II, 9</ref>, and note) had died before his father,
Cynegils.</note> succeeded
him on the throne, but refused to receive the faith and
the mysteries of the heavenly kingdom; and not long
after he lost also the dominion of his earthly kingdom;
for he put away the sister of Penda, king of the Mercians,
whom he had married, and took another wife; whereupon
a war ensuing, he was by him deprived of his
kingdom, and withdrew to Anna, king of the East
Angles, where he lived three years in banishment, and
learned and received the true faith; for the king, with
whom he lived in his banishment, was a good man, and
happy in a good and saintly offspring, as we shall show
hereafter.<note place='foot'>Bede reverts more than once to the subject of Anna's pious
offspring, <hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi> cc. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VIII'>8</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XVIII'>18</ref>; IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIX'>19</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XX'>20</ref>. He had four daughters:
Sexburg (c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VIII'>8</ref>, IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIX'>19</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXII'>22</ref>), Ethelberg (c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VIII'>8</ref>), Ethelthryth (IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIX'>19</ref>,
<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XX'>20</ref>; cf. IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_III'>3</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXII'>22</ref>), and Witberg (not mentioned by Bede); two
granddaughters, Earcongota (c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VIII'>8</ref>) and Ermingild, the wife of
Wulfhere of Mercia; all of whom entered convents, as did also
his step-daughter, Saethryth (c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VIII'>8</ref>).</note>
</p>

<p>
But when Coinwalch was restored to his kingdom,
there came into that province out of Ireland, a certain
bishop called Agilbert,<note place='foot'>Cc. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXV'>25</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVI'>26</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVIII'>28</ref>; <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_I'>IV, 1</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>V, 19</ref>. The name is a Frankish form of
the English <q>Aethelbert.</q> He was apparently consecrated in
Gaul, but not appointed to any diocese.</note> a native of Gaul, but who had
then lived a long time in Ireland, for the purpose of reading
the Scriptures. He attached himself to the king,
and voluntarily undertook the ministry of preaching. The
king, observing his learning and industry, desired him
to accept an episcopal see there and remain as the bishop
of his people. Agilbert complied with the request, and
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
presided over that nation as their bishop for many years.
At length the king, who understood only the language
of the Saxons, weary of his barbarous tongue, privately
brought into the province another bishop, speaking his
own language, by name Wini,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVIII'>28</ref>. It is not known why he was expelled (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi>).
There is a tradition that he spent the last three years of his life
at Winchester as a penitent, doubtless for the act of simony related
below, but this is inconsistent with Bede's statement that
he remained Bishop of London till his death.</note> who had also been
ordained in Gaul; and dividing his province into two
dioceses, appointed this last his episcopal see in the city
of Venta, by the Saxons called Wintancaestir.<note place='foot'>Winchester; <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> pp. <ref target='Pg148'>148-9</ref>, notes.</note> Agilbert,
being highly offended, that the king should do this
without consulting him, returned into Gaul, and being
made bishop of the city of Paris, died there, being old
and full of days. Not many years after his departure
out of Britain, Wini was also expelled from his bishopric
by the same king, and took refuge with Wulfhere, king
of the Mercians, of whom he purchased for money the
see of the city of London,<note place='foot'>London was an East Saxon bishopric, but Wulfhere (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>,
<hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>) had acquired the supremacy over the East Saxons (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi>
c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXX'>30</ref>).</note> and remained bishop thereof
till his death. Thus the province of the West Saxons
continued no small time without a bishop.
</p>

<p>
During which time, the aforesaid king of that nation,
sustaining repeatedly very great losses in his kingdom
from his enemies, at length bethought himself, that as
he had been before expelled from the throne for his unbelief,
he had been restored when he acknowledged the
faith of Christ; and he perceived that his kingdom, being
deprived of a bishop, was justly deprived also of the
Divine protection. He, therefore, sent messengers into
Gaul to Agilbert, with humble apologies entreating him
to return to the bishopric of his nation. But he excused
himself, and protested that he could not go, because he
was bound to the bishopric of his own city and diocese;
notwithstanding, in order to give him some help in answer
to his earnest request, he sent thither in his stead the priest
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
Leutherius,<note place='foot'>Hlothere, consecrated 670. Apparently he was appointed by a
West Saxon Synod (<q>ex synodica sanctione</q>). Dr. Bright thinks
the term is used loosely for a Witenagemot.</note> his nephew, to be ordained as his bishop, if
he thought fit, saying that he thought him worthy of a
bishopric. The king and the people received him honourably,
and asked Theodore, then Archbishop of Canterbury,
to consecrate him as their bishop. He was accordingly
consecrated in the same city, and many years
diligently governed the whole bishopric of the West
Saxons by synodical authority.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_VIII'/>
<head>Chap. VIII. How Earconbert, King of Kent, ordered
the idols to be destroyed; and of his daughter Earcongota,
and his kinswoman Ethelberg, virgins consecrated to
God. [640 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 640, Eadbald,<note place='foot'>II, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_V'>5-9</ref>, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XX'>20</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>V, 24</ref>.</note> king of Kent,
departed this life, and left his kingdom to his son
Earconbert, who governed it most nobly twenty-four
years and some months. He was the first of the English
kings that of his supreme authority commanded the
idols throughout his whole kingdom to be forsaken
and destroyed, and the fast of forty days to be observed;
and that the same might not be lightly neglected, he
appointed fitting and condign punishments for the
offenders. His daughter Earcongota, as became the
offspring of such a parent, was a most virtuous virgin,
serving God in a monastery in the country of the Franks,
built by a most noble abbess, named Fara, at a place
called In Brige;<note place='foot'>Faremoûtier-en-Brie (Farae Monasterium in Brige), founded
<hi rend='italic'>circ.</hi> 617 by Fara, or Burgundofara, a Burgundian lady of noble
birth, said to have been dedicated by St. Columba in her infancy.
The monastery was a double one, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, consisted of monks and
nuns (cf. <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>, <q>many of the brethren</q>).</note> for at that time but few monasteries
had been built in the country of the Angles, and many
were wont, for the sake of monastic life, to repair to the
monasteries of the Franks or Gauls; and they also sent
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
their daughters there to be instructed, and united to
their Heavenly Bridegroom, especially in the monasteries
of Brige, of Cale,<note place='foot'>Chelles, near Paris, founded by Clothilde, wife of Clovis I,
restored and enlarged by Bathild, wife of Clovis II (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>V, 19</ref>, note).</note> and Andilegum.<note place='foot'>Andeley-sur-Seine, also founded by Clothilde, wife of Clovis I.</note> Among whom was
also Saethryth,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>7</ref>, note on Anna.</note> daughter of the wife of Anna, king of the
East Angles, above mentioned; and Ethelberg,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note> the
king's own daughter; both of whom, though strangers,
were for their virtue made abbesses of the monastery of
Brige. Sexburg,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note> that king's elder daughter, wife to
Earconbert, king of Kent, had a daughter called Earcongota,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note>
of whom we are about to speak.
</p>

<p>
Many wonderful works and miracles of this virgin,
dedicated to God, are to this day related by the inhabitants
of that place; but for us it shall suffice to say
something briefly of her departure out of this world to
the heavenly kingdom. The day of her summoning
drawing near, she began to visit in the monastery the
cells of the infirm handmaidens of Christ, and particularly
those that were of a great age, or most noted for
their virtuous life, and humbly commending herself
to their prayers, she let them know that her death was
at hand, as she had learnt by revelation, which she
said she had received in this manner. She had seen a
band of men, clothed in white, come into the monastery,
and being asked by her what they wanted, and what
they did there, they answered, <q>They had been sent
thither to carry away with them the gold coin that had
been brought thither from Kent.</q> Towards the close of
that same night, as morning began to dawn, leaving the
darkness of this world, she departed to the light of
heaven. Many of the brethren of that monastery who
were in other houses, declared they had then plainly
heard choirs of singing angels, and, as it were, the
sound of a multitude entering the monastery. Whereupon
going out immediately to see what it might be,
they beheld a great light coming down from heaven,
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
which bore that holy soul, set loose from the bonds of
the flesh, to the eternal joys of the celestial country.
They also tell of other miracles that were wrought that
night in the same monastery by the power of God; but
as we must proceed to other matters, we leave them to
be related by those whose concern they are. The body
of this venerable virgin and bride of Christ was buried in
the church of the blessed protomartyr, Stephen. It was
thought fit, three days after, to take up the stone that
covered the tomb, and to raise it higher in the same
place, and whilst they were doing this, so sweet a
fragrance rose from below, that it seemed to all the
brethren and sisters there present, as if a store of balsam
had been opened.
</p>

<p>
Her aunt also, Ethelberg, of whom we have spoken,
preserved the glory, acceptable to God, of perpetual
virginity, in a life of great self-denial, but the extent
of her virtue became more conspicuous after her death.
Whilst she was abbess, she began to build in her
monastery a church, in honour of all the Apostles,
wherein she desired that her body should be buried;
but when that work was advanced half way, she was
prevented by death from finishing it, and was buried in
the place in the church which she had chosen. After her
death, the brothers occupied themselves with other
things, and this structure was left untouched for seven
years, at the expiration whereof they resolved, by reason
of the greatness of the work, wholly to abandon the
building of the church, and to remove the abbess's bones
thence to some other church that was finished and consecrated.
On opening her tomb, they found the body as
untouched by decay as it had been free from the corruption
of carnal concupiscence, and having washed it again
and clothed it in other garments, they removed it to the
church of the blessed Stephen, the Martyr. And her
festival is wont to be celebrated there with much honour
on the 7th of July.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_IX'/>
<head>Chap. IX. How miracles of healing have been frequently
wrought in the place where King Oswald was killed;
and how, first, a traveller's horse was restored and
afterwards a young girl cured of the palsy. [642 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Oswald, the most Christian king of the Northumbrians,
reigned nine years, including that year which was held
accursed for the barbarous cruelty of the king of the
Britons and the reckless apostacy of the English kings;
for, as was said above,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_I'>1</ref>.</note> it is agreed by the unanimous
consent of all, that the names and memory of the apostates
should be erased from the catalogue of the Christian
kings, and no year assigned to their reign. After which
period, Oswald was killed in a great battle, by the same
pagan nation and pagan king of the Mercians, who had
slain his predecessor Edwin, at a place called in the
English tongue Maserfelth,<note place='foot'>The place is commonly supposed to be near Oswestry in Shropshire
(<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, Oswald's Tree). There is a legend (related by Reginald)
which tells of a tree near the spot, to which a large bird carried
the king's right arm from the stake (cf. c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XII'>12</ref> <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>). The Welsh
name of the place, <q>Croes Oswallt</q> (Cross-Oswald), points to the
explanation that the <q>tree</q> was a wooden cross set up to mark
the site.</note> in the thirty-eighth year of
his age, on the fifth day of the month of August.<note place='foot'>642, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, nine years after the death of Edwin.</note>
</p>

<p>
How great his faith was towards God, and how remarkable
his devotion, has been made evident by miracles
even after his death; for, in the place where he was
killed by the pagans, fighting for his country, sick men
and cattle are frequently healed to this day. Whence it
came to pass that many took up the very dust of the
place where his body fell, and putting it into water,
brought much relief with it to their friends who were sick.
This custom came so much into use, that the earth being
carried away by degrees, a hole was made as deep as the
height of a man. Nor is it surprising that the sick
should be healed in the place where he died; for, whilst
he lived, he never ceased to provide for the poor and the
sick, and to bestow alms on them, and assist them.
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
Many miracles are said to have been wrought in that
place, or with the dust carried from it; but we have
thought it sufficient to mention two, which we have
heard from our elders.
</p>

<p>
It happened, not long after his death, that a man was
travelling on horseback near that place, when his horse
on a sudden fell sick, stood still, hung his head, and
foamed at the mouth, and, at length, as his pain increased,
he fell to the ground; the rider dismounted,
and taking off his saddle,<note place='foot'>Reading <foreign rend='italic'>stramine subtracto</foreign>, on the authority of the oldest MSS.,
in which case we must assume (with Plummer) that <foreign rend='italic'>stramen</foreign> is
used incorrectly for <foreign rend='italic'>stragulus</foreign> in the sense of <q>saddle,</q> or <q>horse-cloth,</q>
from the classical use, <foreign rend='italic'>sternere equum</foreign> = to saddle. Cf.
<q>stratus regaliter,</q> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIV'>14</ref>. Later MSS. read <foreign rend='italic'>stramine substrato</foreign>
(= <q>spreading straw under him</q>).</note> waited to see whether the
beast would recover or die. At length, after writhing
for a long time in extreme anguish, the horse happened
in his struggles to come to the very place where the
great king died. Immediately the pain abated, the beast
ceased from his frantic kicking, and, after the manner of
horses, as if resting from his weariness, he rolled from
side to side, and then starting up, perfectly recovered,
began to graze hungrily on the green herbage. The rider
observing this, and being an intelligent man, concluded
that there must be some wonderful sanctity in the place
where the horse had been healed, and he marked the
spot. After which he again mounted his horse, and
went on to the inn where he intended to stop. On his
arrival he found a girl, niece to the landlord, who had
long been sick of the palsy; and when the members of the
household, in his presence, lamented the girl's grievous
calamity, he gave them an account of the place where
his horse had been cured. In brief, she was put into a
wagon and carried to the place and laid down there. At
first she slept awhile, and when she awoke, found herself
healed of her infirmity. Upon which she called for water,
washed her face, arranged her hair, put a kerchief on
her head, and returned home on foot, in good health,
with those who had brought her.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. X. How the dust of that place prevailed against
fire. [After 642 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
About the same time, another traveller, a Briton, as is
reported, happened to pass by the same place, where the
aforesaid battle was fought. Observing one particular
spot of ground greener and more beautiful than any
other part of the field, he had the wisdom to infer that
the cause of the unusual greenness in that place must be
that some person of greater holiness than any other in
the army had been killed there. He therefore took along
with him some of the dust of that piece of ground, tying
it up in a linen cloth, supposing, as was indeed the case,
that it would be of use for curing sick people, and proceeding
on his journey, came in the evening to a certain
village, and entered a house where the villagers were feasting
at supper. Being received by the owners of the house,
he sat down with them at the entertainment, hanging the
cloth, with the dust which he had carried in it, on a post
in the wall. They sat long at supper and drank deep.
Now there was a great fire in the middle of the room,
and it happened that the sparks flew up and caught the
roof of the house, which being made of wattles and
thatch, was suddenly wrapped in flames; the guests ran
out in panic and confusion, but they were not able to
save the burning house, which was rapidly being destroyed.
Wherefore the house was burnt down, and only
that post on which the dust hung in the linen cloth
remained safe and untouched by the fire. When they
beheld this miracle, they were all amazed, and inquiring
into it diligently, learned that the dust had been taken
from the place where the blood of King Oswald had been
shed. These wonderful works being made known and
reported abroad, many began daily to resort to that
place, and received the blessing of health for themselves
and their friends.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_XI'/>
<head>Chap. XI. How a light from Heaven stood all night
over his relics, and how those possessed with devils were
healed by them. [679-697 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Among the rest, I think we ought not to pass over in
silence the miracles and signs from Heaven that were
shown when King Oswald's bones were found, and
translated into the church where they are now preserved.
This was done by the zealous care of Osthryth, queen of
the Mercians,<note place='foot'>Wife of Ethelred of Mercia (cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXI'>IV, 21</ref>), murdered by her own
people in 697 (<ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>V, 24</ref>).</note> the daughter of his brother Oswy, who
reigned after him, as shall be said hereafter.
</p>

<p>
There is a famous monastery in the province of Lindsey,
called Beardaneu,<note place='foot'>Bardney, in Lincolnshire. Ethelred became first a monk, afterwards
abbot of the monastery.</note> which that queen and her husband
Ethelred greatly loved and venerated, conferring
upon it many honours. It was here that she was desirous
to lay the revered bones of her uncle. When the
wagon in which those bones were carried arrived towards
evening at the aforesaid monastery, they that were in it
were unwilling to admit them, because, though they
knew him to be a holy man, yet, as he was a native of
another province, and had obtained the sovereignty over
them, they retained their ancient aversion to him even
after his death. Thus it came to pass that the relics were
left in the open air all that night, with only a large tent
spread over the wagon which contained them. But it
was revealed by a sign from Heaven with how much
reverence they ought to be received by all the faithful;
for all that night, a pillar of light, reaching from the
wagon up to heaven, was visible in almost every part of
the province of Lindsey. Hereupon, in the morning, the
brethren of that monastery who had refused it the day
before, began themselves earnestly to pray that those
holy relics, beloved of God, might be laid among them.
Accordingly, the bones, being washed, were put into a
shrine which they had made for that purpose, and placed
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
in the church, with due honour; and that there might be
a perpetual memorial of the royal character of this holy
man, they hung up over the monument his banner of
gold and purple. Then they poured out the water in
which they had washed the bones, in a corner of the
cemetery.<note place='foot'><q>Sacrarium.</q> Probably here = the cemetery. But we find it
elsewhere in Bede for the sacristy, and it is also used of the
sanctuary.</note> From that time, the very earth which received
that holy water, had the power of saving grace in casting
out devils from the bodies of persons possessed.
</p>

<p>
Lastly, when the aforesaid queen afterwards abode
some time in that monastery, there came to visit her a
certain venerable abbess, who is still living, called
Ethelhild, the sister of the holy men, Ethelwin<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVII'>27</ref>; <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>IV, 12</ref>.</note> and
Aldwin, the first of whom was bishop in the province of
Lindsey, the other abbot of the monastery of Peartaneu;<note place='foot'>Partney: cf. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XVI'>II, 16</ref>, and note. This is the only mention of its
abbot, Aldwin.</note>
not far from which was the monastery of Ethelhild.
When this lady was come, in a conversation between
her and the queen, the discourse, among other things,
turning upon Oswald, she said, that she also had that
night seen the light over his relics reaching up to
heaven. The queen thereupon added, that the very dust
of the pavement on which the water that washed the
bones had been poured out, had already healed many
sick persons. The abbess thereupon desired that some
of that health-bringing dust might be given her, and,
receiving it, she tied it up in a cloth, and, putting it into
a casket, returned home. Some time after, when she
was in her monastery, there came to it a guest, who was
wont often in the night to be on a sudden grievously
tormented with an unclean spirit; he being hospitably
entertained, when he had gone to bed after supper, was
suddenly seized by the Devil, and began to cry out, to
gnash his teeth, to foam at the mouth, and to writhe
and distort his limbs. None being able to hold or bind
him, the servant ran, and knocking at the door, told
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
the abbess. She, opening the monastery door, went out
herself with one of the nuns to the men's apartment, and
calling a priest, desired that he would go with her to the
sufferer. Being come thither, and seeing many present,
who had not been able, by their efforts, to hold the tormented
person and restrain his convulsive movements,
the priest used exorcisms, and did all that he could to
assuage the madness of the unfortunate man, but, though
he took much pains, he could not prevail. When no
hope appeared of easing him in his ravings, the abbess
bethought herself of the dust, and immediately bade
her handmaiden go and fetch her the casket in which
it was. As soon as she came with it, as she had been
bidden, and was entering the hall of the house, in the
inner part whereof the possessed person was writhing in
torment, he suddenly became silent, and laid down his
head, as if he had been falling asleep, stretching out all
his limbs to rest. <q>Silence fell upon all and intent they
gazed,</q><note place='foot'>Aen. II, 1. Quotations from Vergil are frequent in Bede.
Cf. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XIII'>II, 13</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>; v. 12, p. <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref>.</note> anxiously waiting to see the end of the matter.
And after about the space of an hour the man that had
been tormented sat up, and fetching a deep sigh, said,
<q>Now I am whole, for I am restored to my senses.</q>
They earnestly inquired how that came to pass, and he
answered, <q>As soon as that maiden drew near the hall
of this house, with the casket she brought, all the evil
spirits that vexed me departed and left me, and were
no more to be seen.</q> Then the abbess gave him a little
of that dust, and the priest having prayed, he passed
that night in great peace; nor was he, from that time
forward, alarmed by night, or in any way troubled by his
old enemy.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_XII'/>
<head>Chap. XII. How a little boy was cured of a fever at his
tomb.</head>

<p>
Some time after, there was a certain little boy in the said
monastery, who had been long grievously troubled with
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
a fever; he was one day anxiously expecting the hour
when his fit was to come on, when one of the brothers,
coming in to him, said, <q>Shall I tell you, my son, how
you may be cured of this sickness? Rise, enter the
church, and go close to Oswald's tomb; sit down and
stay there quiet and do not leave it; do not come away,
or stir from the place, till the time is past, when the fever
leaves you: then I will go in and fetch you away.</q> The
boy did as he was advised, and the disease durst not
assail him as he sat by the saint's tomb; but fled in such
fear that it did not dare to touch him, either the second
or third day, or ever after. The brother that came from
thence, and told me this, added, that at the time when
he was talking with me, the young man was then still
living in the monastery, on whom, when a boy, that
miracle of healing had been wrought. Nor need we
wonder that the prayers of that king who is now reigning
with our Lord, should be very efficacious with Him,
since he, whilst yet governing his temporal kingdom,
was always wont to pray and labour more for that which
is eternal. Nay, it is said, that he often continued in
prayer from the hour of morning thanksgiving<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, matins (between midnight and 3 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.m.</hi>).</note> till it
was day; and that by reason of his constant custom of
praying or giving thanks to God, he was wont always,
wherever he sat, to hold his hands on his knees with the
palms turned upwards. It is also commonly affirmed
and has passed into a proverb, that he ended his life in
prayer; for when he was beset with the weapons of his
enemies, and perceived that death was at hand, he
prayed for the souls of his army. Whence it is proverbially
said, <q><q>Lord have mercy on their souls,</q> said
Oswald, as he fell to the ground.</q>
</p>

<p>
Now his bones were translated to the monastery which
we have mentioned, and buried therein: but the king
who slew him commanded his head, and hands, with the
arms, to be cut off from the body, and set upon stakes.
But his successor in the throne, Oswy, coming thither
the next year with his army, took them down, and buried
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
his head in the cemetery of the church of Lindisfarne,<note place='foot'>It was removed in 875, during the Danish invasions, in the
coffin of St. Cuthbert, and finally interred in the same tomb with
the body of Cuthbert at Durham, where it was found in 1827.
Hence St. Cuthbert is often represented holding St. Oswald's head
in his hands.</note>
and the hands and arms in his royal city.<note place='foot'>Bamborough: cf. c. 6, note.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_XIII'/>
<head>Chap. XIII. How a certain person in Ireland was restored,
when at the point of death, by his relics.</head>

<p>
Nor was the fame of the renowned Oswald confined to
Britain, but, spreading rays of healing light even beyond
the sea, reached also to Germany and Ireland. For the
most reverend prelate, Acca,<note place='foot'>Bishop of Hexham, 709-731: <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XX'>V, 20</ref> (cf. also <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIV'>IV, 14</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>V, 19</ref>).
He was a much loved friend of Bede, many of whose works were
undertaken at his instigation. He was devotedly attached to
Wilfrid, whom he succeeded at Hexham. The <ref target='Continuation'><q>Continuation</q></ref>
says that he was expelled from his see in 731, and he probably
never regained it.</note> is wont to relate, that
when, in his journey to Rome,<note place='foot'>Cf. V. 19, p. <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>. This was probably Wilfrid's third journey to
Rome, undertaken in 703-704, for, at the time of his earlier journey
(in 678), when he spent the winter in Frisland, Wilbrord was not
yet there.</note> he and his bishop Wilfrid
stayed some time with Wilbrord,<note place='foot'>The great missionary archbishop of the Frisians. He was
trained as a boy in Wilfrid's abbey at Ripon, studied some time in
Ireland, and with eleven companions undertook in 690 the mission
to Frisland planned by Egbert: <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> V, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_X'>10</ref>, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XI'>11</ref>. (For Egbert, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi>
c. 4, p. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>, and note.)</note> the holy archbishop
of the Frisians, he often heard him tell of the wonders
which had been wrought in that province at the relics of
that most worshipful king. And he used to say that in
Ireland, when, being yet only a priest, he led the life of
a stranger and pilgrim for love of the eternal country,
the fame of that king's sanctity was already spread far
and near in that island also. One of the miracles, among
the rest, which he related, we have thought fit to insert
in this our history.
</p>

<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>

<p>
<q>At the time,</q> said he, <q>of the plague which made
such widespread havoc in Britain and Ireland, among
others, a certain scholar of the Scottish race was smitten
with the disease, a man learned in the study of letters,
but in no way careful or studious of his eternal salvation;
who, seeing his death near at hand, began to fear and
tremble lest, as soon as he was dead, he should be
hurried away to the prison-house of Hell for his sins.
He called me, for I was near, and trembling and sighing
in his weakness, with a lamentable voice made his complaint
to me, after this manner: <q>You see that my bodily
distress increases, and that I am now reduced to the
point of death. Nor do I question but that after the
death of my body, I shall be immediately snatched away
to the everlasting death of my soul, and cast into the
torments of hell, since for a long time, amidst all my
reading of divine books, I have suffered myself to be
ensnared by sin, instead of keeping the commandments
of God. But it is my resolve, if the Divine Mercy
shall grant me a new term of life, to correct my sinful
habits, and wholly to devote anew my mind and life to
obedience to the Divine will. But I know that I have no
merits of my own whereby to obtain a prolongation of
life, nor can I hope to have it, unless it shall please God
to forgive me, wretched and unworthy of pardon as I
am, through the help of those who have faithfully served
him. We have heard, and the report is widespread,
that there was in your nation a king, of wonderful
sanctity, called Oswald, the excellency of whose faith
and virtue has been made famous even after his death
by the working of many miracles. I beseech you, if you
have any relics of his in your keeping, that you will
bring them to me; if haply the Lord shall be pleased,
through his merits, to have mercy on me.</q> I answered,
<q>I have indeed a part of the stake on which his head was
set up by the pagans, when he was killed, and if you
believe with steadfast heart, the Divine mercy may,
through the merits of so great a man, both grant you a
longer term of life here, and render you worthy to be
admitted into eternal life.</q> He answered immediately
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
that he had entire faith therein. Then I blessed some
water, and put into it a splinter of the aforesaid oak,
and gave it to the sick man to drink. He presently
found ease, and, recovering of his sickness, lived a long
time after; and, being entirely converted to God in heart
and deed, wherever he went, he spoke of the goodness
of his merciful Creator, and the honour of His faithful
servant.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_XIV'/>
<head>Chap. XIV. How on the death of Paulinus, Ithamar
was made bishop of Rochester in his stead; and of the
wonderful humility of King Oswin, who was cruelly
slain by Oswy. [644-651 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Oswald being translated to the heavenly kingdom, his
brother Oswy,<note place='foot'>The third of Ethelfrid's seven sons (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Sax. Chron.) to succeed
to the sovereignty. With his brothers he had spent his youth
in banishment among the Picts and Scots (<hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_I'>1</ref>).</note> a young man of about thirty years of
age, succeeded him on the throne of his earthly kingdom,
and held it twenty-eight years with much trouble,
being attacked by the pagan nation of the Mercians, that
had slain his brother, as also by his son Alchfrid,<note place='foot'>Cc. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXI'>21</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXV'>25</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVIII'>28</ref>. The pupil and friend of Wilfrid. He was
made sub-king of Deira in place of Ethelwald (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> next note). The
date and circumstances of his rebellion are not known. A cross
at Bewcastle in Cumberland, erected in 670 or 671, commemorates
him and asks prayers for his soul.</note> and
by his nephew Oidilwald,<note place='foot'>Ethelwald, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> cc. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>.</note> the son of his brother who
reigned before him. In his second year, that is, in the
year of our Lord 644, the most reverend Father Paulinus,
formerly Bishop of York, but at that time Bishop of the
city of Rochester, departed to the Lord, on the 10th day
of October, having held the office of a bishop nineteen
years, two months, and twenty-one days; and was buried
in the sacristy of the blessed Apostle Andrew,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_III'>II, 3</ref>.</note> which
King Ethelbert had built from the foundation, in the
same city of Rochester. In his place, Archbishop Honorius
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
ordained Ithamar,<note place='foot'>The first bishop of English birth. For Honorius, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XV'>II, 15</ref>,
note.</note> of the Kentish nation, but not inferior
to his predecessors in learning and conduct of life.
</p>

<p>
Oswy, during the first part of his reign, had a partner
in the royal dignity called Oswin, of the race of King
Edwin, and son to Osric<note place='foot'>The apostate king of Deira, Osric, son of Aelfric, was first
cousin to Edwin (cf. c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_I'>1</ref>). Oswald united the two Northumbrian
kingdoms, but at his death, Oswin, son of Osric, succeeded to
Deira. He was canonised, and his tragic death led him to be
regarded as a martyr.</note> of whom we have spoken
above, a man of wonderful piety and devotion, who
governed the province of the Deiri seven years in very
great prosperity, and was himself beloved by all men.
But Oswy, who governed all the other northern part of
the nation beyond the Humber, that is, the province of
the Bernicians, could not live at peace with him; and at
last, when the causes of their disagreement increased,
he murdered him most cruelly. For when each had
raised an army against the other, Oswin perceived that
he could not maintain a war against his enemy who had
more auxiliaries than himself, and he thought it better at
that time to lay aside all thoughts of engaging, and to
reserve himself for better times. He therefore disbanded
the army which he had assembled, and ordered all his
men to return to their own homes, from the place that
is called Wilfaraesdun,<note place='foot'>Not identified. The village (<q>a vico Cataractone</q>) is probably
the one called Cataracta in <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XIV'>II, 14</ref> (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> note, <hi rend='italic'>ad loc.</hi>).</note> that is, Wilfar's Hill, which is
about ten miles distant from the village called Cataract,
towards the north-west. He himself, with only one
trusty thegn, whose name was Tondhere, withdrew and
lay concealed in the house of Hunwald, a noble,<note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Comes</foreign>, A.S. <foreign rend='italic'>gesith</foreign>.</note> whom
he imagined to be his most assured friend. But, alas!
it was far otherwise; for Hunwald betrayed him, and
Oswy, by the hands of his reeve, Ethilwin, foully slew
him and the thegn aforesaid. This happened on the 20th
of August, in the ninth year of his reign, at a place
called Ingetlingum, where afterwards, to atone for this
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
crime, a monastery was built,<note place='foot'>At Queen Eanfled's request (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> c. 24, p. <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>). The place is
generally identified with Gilling in the North Riding of Yorkshire.
For the form of the name, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> II, 14, p. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, note 5.</note> wherein prayers should
be daily offered up to God for the redemption of the
souls of both kings, to wit, of him that was murdered,
and of him that commanded the murder.
</p>

<p>
King Oswin was of a goodly countenance, and tall of
stature, pleasant in discourse, and courteous in behaviour;
and bountiful to all, gentle and simple alike;
so that he was beloved by all men for the royal dignity
of his mind and appearance and actions, and men of the
highest rank came from almost all provinces to serve
him. Among all the graces of virtue and moderation by
which he was distinguished and, if I may say so, blessed
in a special manner, humility is said to have been the
greatest, which it will suffice to prove by one instance.
</p>

<p>
He had given a beautiful horse to Bishop Aidan, to use
either in crossing rivers, or in performing a journey upon
any urgent necessity, though the Bishop was wont to
travel ordinarily on foot. Some short time after, a poor
man meeting the Bishop, and asking alms, he immediately
dismounted, and ordered the horse, with all his royal
trappings, to be given to the beggar; for he was very
compassionate, a great friend to the poor, and, in a
manner, the father of the wretched. This being told to
the king, when they were going in to dinner, he said to
the Bishop, <q>What did you mean, my lord Bishop, by
giving the poor man that royal horse, which it was fitting
that you should have for your own use? Had not we
many other horses of less value, or things of other sorts,
which would have been good enough to give to the poor,
instead of giving that horse, which I had chosen and
set apart for your own use?</q> Thereupon the Bishop
answered, <q>What do you say, O king? Is that son of a
mare more dear to you than that son of God?</q> Upon
this they went in to dinner, and the Bishop sat in his
place; but the king, who had come in from hunting,
stood warming himself, with his attendants, at the fire.
Then, on a sudden, whilst he was warming himself, calling
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
to mind what the bishop had said to him, he ungirt his
sword, and gave it to a servant, and hastened to the
Bishop and fell down at his feet, beseeching him to forgive
him; <q>For from this time forward,</q> said he, <q>I
will never speak any more of this, nor will I judge of
what or how much of our money you shall give to the
sons of God.</q> The bishop was much moved at this sight,
and starting up, raised him, saying that he was entirely
reconciled to him, if he would but sit down to his meat,
and lay aside all sorrow. The king, at the bishop's
command and request, was comforted, but the bishop,
on the other hand, grew sad and was moved even to
tears. His priest then asking him, in the language of
his country, which the king and his servants did not
understand, why he wept, <q>I know,</q> said he, <q>that
the king will not live long; for I never before saw a
humble king; whence I perceive that he will soon be
snatched out of this life, because this nation is not
worthy of such a ruler.</q> Not long after, the bishop's
gloomy foreboding was fulfilled by the king's sad death,
as has been said above. But Bishop Aidan himself was
also taken out of this world, not more than twelve days
after the death of the king he loved, on the 31st of
August,<note place='foot'>In 651 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> Cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>V. 24</ref>.</note> to receive the eternal reward of his labours from
the Lord.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_XV'/>
<head>Chap. XV. How Bishop Aidan foretold to certain seamen
that a storm would arise, and gave them some holy
oil to calm it. [Between 642 and 645 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
How great the merits of Aidan were, was made manifest
by the Judge of the heart, with the testimony of miracles,
whereof it will suffice to mention three, that they may
not be forgotten. A certain priest, whose name was
Utta,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXI'>21</ref>.</note> a man of great weight and sincerity, and on that
account honoured by all men, even the princes of the
world, was sent to Kent, to bring thence, as wife for
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
King Oswy, Eanfled,<note place='foot'>II, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_IX'>9</ref>, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XX'>20</ref>; III, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXV'>25</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIX'>29</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_IX'>V, 19</ref>.</note> the daughter of King Edwin, who
had been carried thither when her father was killed.
Intending to go thither by land, but to return with the
maiden by sea, he went to Bishop Aidan, and entreated
him to offer up his prayers to the Lord for him and his
company, who were then to set out on so long a journey.
He, blessing them, and commending them to the Lord,
at the same time gave them some holy oil, saying, <q>I
know that when you go on board ship, you will meet
with a storm and contrary wind; but be mindful to cast
this oil I give you into the sea, and the wind will cease
immediately; you will have pleasant calm weather to
attend you and send you home by the way that you
desire.</q>
</p>

<p>
All these things fell out in order, even as the bishop had
foretold. For first, the waves of the sea raged, and the
sailors endeavoured to ride it out at anchor, but all to no
purpose; for the sea sweeping over the ship on all sides
and beginning to fill it with water, they all perceived
that death was at hand and about to overtake them.
The priest at last, remembering the bishop's words, laid
hold of the phial and cast some of the oil into the sea,
which at once, as had been foretold, ceased from its
uproar. Thus it came to pass that the man of God, by
the spirit of prophecy, foretold the storm that was to
come to pass, and by virtue of the same spirit, though
absent in the body, calmed it when it had arisen. The
story of this miracle was not told me by a person of
little credit, but by Cynimund, a most faithful priest of
our church,<note place='foot'>The monastery of Wearmouth and Jarrow. Cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVIII'>IV, 18</ref>; V, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXI'>21</ref>
<hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi>, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>.</note> who declared that it was related to him by
Utta, the priest, in whose case and through whom the
same was wrought.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_XVI'/>
<head>Chap. XVI. How the same Aidan, by his prayers, saved
the royal city when it was fired by the enemy [Before
651 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Another notable miracle of the same father is related by
many such as were likely to have knowledge thereof;
for during the time that he was bishop, the hostile army
of the Mercians, under the command of Penda, cruelly
ravaged the country of the Northumbrians far and near,
even to the royal city,<note place='foot'>Bamborough, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> cc. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VI'>6</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XII'>12</ref>.</note> which has its name from Bebba,
formerly its queen. Not being able to take it by storm
or by siege, he endeavoured to burn it down; and having
pulled down all the villages in the neighbourhood of the
city, he brought thither an immense quantity of beams,
rafters, partitions, wattles and thatch, wherewith he encompassed
the place to a great height on the land side,
and when he found the wind favourable, he set fire to it
and attempted to burn the town.
</p>

<p>
At that time, the most reverend Bishop Aidan was
dwelling in the Isle of Farne,<note place='foot'>The scene of St. Cuthbert's hermit life: <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVII'>27</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVIII'>28</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIX'>29</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_I'>V, 1</ref>.
It is called the <q>House Island,</q> and is the largest of the Farne
group of seventeen islands off the coast of Northumberland,
opposite Bamborough, famous in modern times for the rescue of a
shipwrecked crew by Grace Darling.</note> which is about two miles
from the city; for thither he was wont often to retire to
pray in solitude and silence; and, indeed, this lonely
dwelling of his is to this day shown in that island.
When he saw the flames of fire and the smoke carried
by the wind rising above the city walls, he is said to have
lifted up his eyes and hands to heaven, and cried with
tears, <q>Behold, Lord, how great evil is wrought by
Penda!</q> These words were hardly uttered, when the
wind immediately veering from the city, drove back the
flames upon those who had kindled them, so that some
being hurt, and all afraid, they forebore any further
attempts against the city, which they perceived to be
protected by the hand of God.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. XVII. How a prop of the church on which
Bishop Aidan was leaning when he died, could not be
consumed when the rest of the Church was on fire; and
concerning his inward life. [651 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Aidan was in the king's township, not far from the city
of which we have spoken above, at the time when death
caused him to quit the body, after he had been bishop
sixteen<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>v.l.</hi> seventeen. The MS. authority is about equal; but cf.
<hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>, the statement that he died in the seventeenth year of his
episcopate, which seems to be correct.</note> years; for having a church and a chamber in
that place, he was wont often to go and stay there, and
to make excursions from it to preach in the country
round about, which he likewise did at other of the king's
townships, having nothing of his own besides his church
and a few fields about it. When he was sick they set up
a tent for him against the wall at the west end of the
church, and so it happened that he breathed his last,
leaning against a buttress that was on the outside of the
church to strengthen the wall. He died in the seventeenth
year of his episcopate, on the 31st of August.<note place='foot'>651 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIV'>14</ref> <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi></note>
His body was thence presently translated to the isle of
Lindisfarne, and buried in the cemetery of the brethren.
Some time after, when a larger church was built there
and dedicated in honour of the blessed prince of the
Apostles, his bones were translated thither, and laid on
the right side of the altar, with the respect due to so
great a prelate.
</p>

<p>
Finan,<note place='foot'>Cc. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXI'>21</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXII'>22</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXV'>25</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVI'>26</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVII'>27</ref>. For his character, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXV'>25</ref> (though
some suppose the reference to be to Ronan). For Hii, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_III'>3</ref>, note.</note> who had likewise been sent thither from Hii,
the island monastery of the Scots, succeeded him, and
continued no small time in the bishopric. It happened
some years after, that Penda, king of the Mercians,
coming into these parts with a hostile army, destroyed
all he could with fire and sword, and the village
where the bishop died, along with the church above
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
mentioned, was burnt down; but it fell out in a wonderful
manner that the buttress against which he had
been leaning when he died, could not be consumed by
the fire which devoured all about it. This miracle being
noised abroad, the church was soon rebuilt in the same
place, and that same buttress was set up on the outside,
as it had been before, to strengthen the wall. It
happened again, some time after, that the village and
likewise the church were carelessly burned down the
second time. Then again, the fire could not touch the
buttress; and, miraculously, though the fire broke
through the very holes of the nails wherewith it was fixed
to the building, yet it could do no hurt to the buttress
itself. When therefore the church was built there the
third time, they did not, as before, place that buttress
on the outside as a support of the building, but within
the church, as a memorial of the miracle; where the
people coming in might kneel, and implore the Divine
mercy. And it is well known that since then many have
found grace and been healed in that same place, as also
that by means of splinters cut off from the buttress, and
put into water, many more have obtained a remedy for
their own infirmities and those of their friends.<note place='foot'>The church and the buttress were evidently both of wood.</note>
</p>

<p>
I have written thus much concerning the character
and works of the aforesaid Aidan, in no way commending
or approving his lack of wisdom with regard to the
observance of Easter; nay, heartily detesting it, as I
have most manifestly proved in the book I have written,
<q>De Temporibus</q>;<note place='foot'>He probably refers to the <q>De Temporum Ratione,</q> the
longer of his two chronological works. It treats the Paschal
question at length. But in the <q>De Temporibus</q> he also briefly
discusses it.</note> but, like an impartial historian,
unreservedly relating what was done by or through
him, and commending such things as are praiseworthy
in his actions, and preserving the memory thereof for
the benefit of the readers; to wit, his love of peace
and charity; of continence and humility; his mind
superior to anger and avarice, and despising pride and
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
vainglory; his industry in keeping and teaching the
Divine commandments, his power of study and keeping
vigil; his priestly authority in reproving the haughty and
powerful, and at the same time his tenderness in comforting
the afflicted, and relieving or defending the poor.
To be brief, so far as I have learnt from those that knew
him, he took care to neglect none of those things which
he found in the Gospels and the writings of Apostles and
prophets, but to the utmost of his power endeavoured to
fulfil them all in his deeds.
</p>

<p>
These things I greatly admire and love in the aforesaid
bishop, because I do not doubt that they were pleasing
to God; but I do not approve or praise his observance of
Easter at the wrong time, either through ignorance of
the canonical time appointed, or, if he knew it, being prevailed
on by the authority of his nation not to adopt it.<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_III'>3</ref>.</note>
Yet this I approve in him, that in the celebration of his
Easter, the object which he had at heart and reverenced
and preached was the same as ours, to wit, the redemption
of mankind, through the Passion, Resurrection and
Ascension into Heaven of the Man Christ Jesus, who is
the mediator between God and man. And therefore he
always celebrated Easter, not as some falsely imagine,
on the fourteenth of the moon, like the Jews, on any day
of the week, but on the Lord's day, from the fourteenth
to the twentieth of the moon; and this he did from his
belief that the Resurrection of our Lord happened on the
first day of the week, and for the hope of our resurrection,
which also he, with the holy Church, believed would
truly happen on that same first day of the week, now
called the Lord's day.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_XVIII'/>
<head>Chap. XVIII. Of the life and death of the religious
King Sigbert. [<hi rend='italic'>Circ.</hi> 631 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
At this time, the kingdom of the East Angles, after the
death of Earpwald, the successor of Redwald, was
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
governed by his brother Sigbert,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_II_Chap_XV'>II, 15</ref>, and note.</note> a good and religious
man, who some time before had been baptized in Gaul,
whilst he lived in banishment, a fugitive from the enmity
of Redwald. When he returned home, as soon as he
ascended the throne, being desirous to imitate the good
institutions which he had seen in Gaul, he founded a
school wherein boys should be taught letters, and was
assisted therein by Bishop Felix, who came to him from
Kent, and who furnished them with masters and teachers
after the manner of the people of Kent.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> The school was probably in the episcopal city of Dunwich,
though it has been maintained that it was the origin of
Cambridge University. For this there seems to be no authority
except a seventeenth century addition to this passage in a twelfth
or thirteenth century MS: <q>Grantebrig schola a Sigberto Rege.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
This king became so great a lover of the heavenly
kingdom, that at last, quitting the affairs of his kingdom,
and committing them to his kinsman Ecgric, who
before had a share in that kingdom, he entered a monastery,
which he had built for himself, and having received
the tonsure, applied himself rather to do battle for a
heavenly throne. A long time after this, it happened
that the nation of the Mercians, under King Penda,
made war on the East Angles; who finding themselves
no match for their enemy, entreated Sigbert to go with
them to battle, to encourage the soldiers. He was unwilling
and refused, upon which they drew him against
his will out of the monastery, and carried him to the
army, hoping that the soldiers would be less afraid and
less disposed to flee in the presence of one who had
formerly been an active and distinguished commander.
But he, still mindful of his profession, surrounded, as he
was, by a royal army, would carry nothing in his hand
but a wand, and was killed with King Ecgric; and the
pagans pressing on, all their army was either slaughtered
or dispersed.
</p>

<p>
They were succeeded in the kingdom by Anna,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. 7, p. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, and note.</note> the
son of Eni, of the blood royal, a good man, and the
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
father of good children, of whom, in the proper place,
we shall speak hereafter. He also was afterwards slain
like his predecessors by the same pagan chief of the
Mercians.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_XIX'/>
<head>Chap. XIX. How Fursa built a monastery among the
East Angles, and of his visions and sanctity, to which,
his flesh remaining uncorrupted after death bore testimony.
[<hi rend='italic'>Circ.</hi> 633 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Whilst Sigbert still governed the kingdom, there came
out of Ireland a holy man called Fursa,<note place='foot'>For a full account of St. Fursa and his brothers, and other
companions mentioned in this chapter, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Miss Margaret Stokes's
<q>Three months in the Forests of France, a pilgrimage in search
of vestiges of the Irish Saints in France.</q> Bede's narrative is taken
from an extant ancient Latin life of St. Fursa (or Fursey), the
<q>libellus de vita ejus conscriptus</q> to which he refers several
times (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi>).</note> renowned both
for his words and actions, and remarkable for singular
virtues, being desirous to live as a stranger and pilgrim
for the Lord's sake, wherever an opportunity should
offer. On coming into the province of the East Angles,
he was honourably received by the aforesaid king, and
performing his wonted task of preaching the Gospel, by
the example of his virtue and the influence of his words,
converted many unbelievers to Christ, and confirmed in
the faith and love of Christ those that already believed.
</p>

<p>
Here he fell into some infirmity of body, and was
thought worthy to see a vision of angels; in which he
was admonished diligently to persevere in the ministry
of the Word which he had undertaken, and indefatigably
to apply himself to his usual watching and prayers; inasmuch
as his end was certain, but the hour thereof
uncertain, according to the saying of our Lord, <q>Watch
therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour.</q><note place='foot'>St. Matt., xxv, 13.</note>
Being confirmed by this vision, he set himself with all
speed to build a monastery on the ground which had
been given him by King Sigbert, and to establish a rule
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
of life therein. This monastery was pleasantly situated
in the woods, near the sea; it was built within the area
of a fort, which in the English language is called Cnobheresburg,
that is, Cnobhere's Town;<note place='foot'>Burgh Castle in Suffolk, where there was a Roman fortress,
Garianonum.</note> afterwards,
Anna, king of that province, and certain of the nobles,
embellished it with more stately buildings and with gifts.
</p>

<p>
This man was of noble Scottish<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, Irish.</note> blood, but much more
noble in mind than in birth. From his boyish years, he
had earnestly applied himself to reading sacred books
and observing monastic discipline, and, as is most
fitting for holy men, he carefully practised all that he
learned to be right.
</p>

<p>
Now, in course of time he himself built a monastery,<note place='foot'>His monastery on Lough Corrib. It is obvious from the sequel
that this vision was prior to his journey to Britain, and is distinct
from the vision mentioned above.</note>
wherein he might with more freedom devote himself to
his heavenly studies. There, falling sick, as the book concerning
his life clearly informs us, he fell into a trance,
and quitting his body from the evening till cockcrow, he
was accounted worthy to behold the sight of the choirs of
angels, and to hear their glad songs of praise. He was
wont to declare, that among other things he distinctly
heard this refrain: <q>The saints shall go from strength to
strength.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. lxxxiv, 7; (lxxxiii, 8, in the Vulgate). The reading is that
of the Vulgate and the Gallican Psalter: <q>Ibunt de virtute in
virtutem: videbitur Deus deorum in Sion.</q></note> And again, <q>The God of gods shall be seen
in Sion.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note> Being restored to his body, and again taken
from it three days after, he not only saw the greater joys
of the blessed, but also fierce conflicts of evil spirits,
who by frequent accusations wickedly endeavoured to
obstruct his journey to heaven; but the angels protected
him, and all their endeavours were in vain. Concerning
all these matters, if any one desires to be more fully
informed, to wit, with what subtlety of deceit the devils
recounted both his actions and idle words, and even his
thoughts, as if they had been written down in a book;
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
and what joyous or grievous tidings he learned from the
holy angels and just men who appeared to him among
the angels; let him read the little book of his life which
I have mentioned, and I doubt not that he will thereby
reap much spiritual profit.
</p>

<p>
But there is one thing among the rest, which we have
thought it may be beneficial to many to insert in this
history. When he had been taken up on high, he was
bidden by the angels that conducted him to look back
upon the world. Upon which, casting his eyes downward,
he saw, as it were, a dark valley in the depths underneath
him. He also saw four fires in the air, not far distant from
each other. Then asking the angels, what fires those
were, he was told, they were the fires which would
kindle and consume the world. One of them was of
falsehood, when we do not fulfil that which we promised
in Baptism, to renounce the Devil and all his works.
The next was of covetousness, when we prefer the riches
of the world to the love of heavenly things. The third
was of discord, when we do not fear to offend our neighbour
even in needless things. The fourth was of ruthlessness
when we think it a light thing to rob and to defraud
the weak. These fires, increasing by degrees, extended
so as to meet one another, and united in one immense
flame. When it drew near, fearing for himself, he said
to the angel, <q>Lord, behold the fire draws near to me.</q>
The angel answered, <q>That which you did not kindle
will not burn you; for though this appears to be a
terrible and great pyre, yet it tries every man according
to the merits of his works; for every man's concupiscence
shall burn in this fire; for as a man burns in the body
through unlawful pleasure, so, when set free from the
body, he shall burn by the punishment which he has
deserved.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then he saw one of the three angels, who had been
his guides throughout both visions, go before and divide
the flaming fires, whilst the other two, flying about on
both sides, defended him from the danger of the fire.
He also saw devils flying through the fire, raising
the flames of war against the just. Then followed
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
accusations of the envious spirits against himself, the
defence of the good spirits, and a fuller vision of the
heavenly hosts; as also of holy men of his own nation,
who, as he had learnt, had worthily held the office of
priesthood in old times, and who were known to fame;
from whom he heard many things very salutary to himself,
and to all others that would listen to them. When
they had ended their discourse, and returned to Heaven
with the angelic spirits, there remained with the blessed
Fursa, the three angels of whom we have spoken
before, and who were to bring him back to the body.
And when they approached the aforesaid great fire, the
angel divided the flame, as he had done before; but
when the man of God came to the passage so opened
amidst the flames, the unclean spirits, laying hold of
one of those whom they were burning in the fire, cast
him against him, and, touching his shoulder and jaw,
scorched them. He knew the man, and called to mind
that he had received his garment when he died. The
holy angel, immediately laying hold of the man, threw
him back into the fire, and the malignant enemy said,
<q>Do not reject him whom you before received; for as you
received the goods of the sinner, so you ought to share
in his punishment.</q> But the angel withstood him, saying,
<q>He did not receive them through avarice, but in
order to save his soul.</q> The fire ceased, and the angel,
turning to him, said, <q>That which you kindled burned
you; for if you had not received the money of this man
that died in his sins, his punishment would not burn
you.</q> And he went on to speak with wholesome counsel
of what ought to be done for the salvation of such as
repented in the hour of death.
</p>

<p>
Being afterwards restored to the body, throughout
the whole course of his life he bore the mark of the fire
which he had felt in the spirit, visible to all men on his
shoulder and jaw; and the flesh openly showed, in a
wonderful manner, what the spirit had suffered in secret.
He always took care, as he had done before, to teach
all men the practice of virtue, as well by his example,
as by preaching. But as for the story of his visions, he
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
would only relate them to those who, from desire of
repentance, questioned him about them. An aged brother
of our monastery is still living, who is wont to relate
that a very truthful and religious man told him, that he
had seen Fursa himself in the province of the East
Angles, and heard those visions from his lips; adding,
that though it was in severe winter weather and a hard
frost, and the man was sitting in a thin garment when
he told the story, yet he sweated as if it had been in the
heat of mid-summer, by reason of the great terror or joy
of which he spoke.
</p>

<p>
To return to what we were saying before, when, after
preaching the Word of God many years in Scotland,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, Ireland.</note>
he could not well endure the disturbance of the crowds
that resorted to him, leaving all that he looked upon as
his own, he departed from his native island, and came
with a few brothers through the Britons into the province
of the English, and preaching the Word there, as has
been said, built a famous monastery.<note place='foot'>The monastery at Burgh Castle.</note> When this was
duly carried out, he became desirous to rid himself of all
business of this world, and even of the monastery itself,
and forthwith left the care of it and of its souls, to his
brother Fullan, and the priests Gobban and Dicull,<note place='foot'>Fullan, or Foillan, was apparently a bishop (the others are
called <q>presbyteri</q>). He and Ultan after Fursa's death (<hi rend='italic'>circ.</hi> 650)
went to South Brabant. Ultan founded a monastery at Fosse in
the diocese of Liège (then of Maestricht), and Fullan laboured in
conjunction with St. Gertrude in the double monastery of Nivelles.
Ultan became abbot, first of Fosse and later of Péronne. The
name Gobban occurs frequently in Irish Church History, Dicull
occasionally. There is a Dicull mentioned in <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIII'>IV, 13</ref>.</note> and
being himself free from all worldly affairs, resolved to
end his life as a hermit. He had another brother called
Ultan, who, after a long monastic probation, had also
adopted the life of an anchorite. So, seeking him out
alone, he lived a whole year with him in self-denial and
prayer, and laboured daily with his hands.
</p>

<p>
Afterwards seeing the province thrown into confusion
by the irruptions of the pagans,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, the Mercians; <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XVIII'>18</ref>.</note> and foreseeing that the
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
monasteries would also be in danger, he left all things
in order, and sailed over into Gaul, and being there
honourably entertained by Clovis, king of the Franks,<note place='foot'>Clovis II, King of Neustria, 638-656. Ercinwald was his
Mayor of the Palace.</note>
or by the patrician Ercinwald, he built a monastery in
the place called Latineacum,<note place='foot'>Lagny on the Marne, near Paris.</note> and falling sick not long
after, departed this life. The same Ercinwald, the patrician,
took his body, and kept it in the porch of a church
he was building in his town of Perrona,<note place='foot'>Péronne on the Somme. The monastery founded there after
his death was called <q>Perrona Scotorum</q> from the number of
Irish who resorted to it.</note> till the church
itself should be dedicated. This happened twenty-seven
days after, and the body being taken from the porch, to
be re-buried near the altar, was found as whole as if he
had died that very hour. And again, four years after,
when a more beautiful shrine had been built to receive
his body to the east of the altar, it was still found without
taint of corruption, and was translated thither with
due honour; where it is well known that his merits,
through the divine operation, have been declared by
many miracles. We have briefly touched upon these
matters as well as the incorruption of his body, that the
lofty nature of the man may be better known to our
readers. All which, as also concerning the comrades of
his warfare, whosoever will read it, will find more fully
described in the book of his life.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_XX'/>
<head>Chap. XX. How, when Honorius died, Deusdedit became
Archbishop of Canterbury; and of those who were
at that time bishops of the East Angles, and of the
church of Rochester. [653 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the meantime, Felix, bishop of the East Angles,
dying, when he had held that see seventeen years,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Circ.</hi> 647. The rapid increase in the number of native bishops
may be seen from this chapter. The only one before Thomas was
Ithamar (cf. c. 14, p. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>).</note>
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
Honorius ordained Thomas his deacon, of the province
of the Gyrwas,<note place='foot'>The Fen country. The province included part of the counties
of Lincoln, Northampton, Huntingdon, and Cambridge.</note> in his place; and he being taken from
this life when he had been bishop five years, Bertgils,
surnamed Boniface,<note place='foot'>Such changes of name were frequent: cf. Benedict for Biscop
(<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVIII'>IV, 18</ref>), Boniface for Winfrid (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Continuation'><q>Continuation</q></ref>), Clement for
Wilbrord (<ref target='Book_V_Chap_XI'>V, 11</ref>), and cf. <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>, <q>Deusdedit.</q></note> of the province of Kent, was appointed
in his stead. Honorius<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_II_Chap_XV'>II, 15</ref>, note.</note> himself also, having
run his course, departed this life in the year of our Lord
653, on the 30th of September; and when the see had
been vacant a year and six months, Deusdedit<note place='foot'>The first archbishop of English birth. He died in 664 (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_I'>IV,
1</ref>). His original name is said to have been Frithonas; Deusdedit
is the Latin form of Theodore. There was a Pope of the same
name, 615-618 (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_II_Chap_VII'>II, 7</ref>). Similar names were common in the
African Church, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, <q>Adeodatus,</q> <q>Habetdeus,</q> <q>Quodvultdeus,</q>
<q>Deogratias.</q></note> of the
nation of the West Saxons, was chosen the sixth Archbishop
of Canterbury. To ordain him, Ithamar,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIV'>14</ref>, and note.</note> bishop
of Rochester, came thither. His ordination was on the
26th of March, and he ruled the church nine years, four
months, and two days; and when Ithamar died, he consecrated
in his place Damian,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_II'>IV, 2</ref>. It has been supposed that he died of the plague of
664. After his death the see was vacant for several years. It is
remarkable that he came of a race which had not yet become
Christian. The South Saxons continued to be pagan till Wilfrid
evangelized them, 681-686 (<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIII'>IV, 13</ref>).</note> who was of the race of
the South Saxons.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_XXI'/>
<head>Chap. XXI. How the province of the Midland Angles
became Christian under King Peada. [653 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
At this time, the Middle Angles, that is, the Angles of
the Midland country,<note place='foot'>For their origin, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XV'>I, 15</ref>. Their country, which was subject to
Mercia, was the present Leicestershire. They are probably to be
identified with the Southern Mercians; <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>, where we find
Peada confirmed by Oswy in the government of that people.</note> under their Prince Peada, the son of
King Penda, received the faith and mysteries of the truth.
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
Being an excellent youth, and most worthy of the name
and office of a king, he was by his father elevated to the
throne of that nation, and came to Oswy, king of the
Northumbrians, requesting to have his daughter Alchfled<note place='foot'>She caused his death by treachery: <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi></note>
given him to wife; but he could not obtain his desire
unless he would receive the faith of Christ, and be baptized,
with the nation which he governed. When he
heard the preaching of the truth, the promise of the
heavenly kingdom, and the hope of resurrection and
future immortality, he declared that he would willingly
become a Christian, even though he should not obtain
the maiden; being chiefly prevailed on to receive the
faith by King Oswy's son Alchfrid,<note place='foot'>C. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIV'>14</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi>, and note.</note> who was his brother-in-law
and friend, for he had married his sister Cyneburg,<note place='foot'>After Alchfrid's death, she took the veil and ruled the monastery
of Caistor (? Cyneburgacaster) in Northamptonshire. She
was one of the five children of the heathen Penda, who were
canonized as saints.</note>
the daughter of King Penda.
</p>

<p>
Accordingly he was baptized by Bishop Finan, with
all his nobles and thegns,<note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Comitibus ac militibus.</foreign> A.S. <q>geferum</q> (companions) and
<q>king's thegns.</q></note> and their servants, that
came along with him, at a noted township, belonging to
the king, called At the Wall.<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXII'>22</ref>. Variously identified with Walton and Walbottle,
both near Newcastle. For the preposition, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> II, 14, p. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, note 5.</note> And having received four
priests, who by reason of their learning and good life
were deemed proper to instruct and baptize his nation,
he returned home with much joy. These priests were
Cedd and Adda, and Betti and Diuma;<note place='foot'>For Cedd, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Preface'>Preface</ref>, and <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi> cc. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXII'>22</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXV'>25</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVI'>26</ref>. The names
of Adda and Betti do not occur again. For Diuma: <hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi> and
c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>.</note> the last of whom
was by nation a Scot, the others English. Adda was
brother to Utta, whom we have mentioned before,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_III_Chap_XV'>III, 15</ref>.</note> a
renowned priest, and abbot of the monastery which is
called At the Goat's Head.<note place='foot'>Gateshead on the Tyne, opposite Newcastle. For the preposition,
cf. II, 14, p. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, note 5.</note> The aforesaid priests,
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
arriving in the province with the prince, preached the
Word, and were heard willingly; and many, as well of
the nobility as the common sort, renouncing the abominations
of idolatry, were daily washed in the fountain
of the faith.
</p>

<p>
Nor did King Penda forbid the preaching of the Word
even among his people, the Mercians, if any were
willing to hear it; but, on the contrary, he hated and
despised those whom he perceived to be without the
works of faith, when they had once received the faith of
Christ, saying, that they were contemptible and wretched
who scorned to obey their God, in whom they believed.
These things were set on foot two years before the death
of King Penda.
</p>

<p>
But when he was slain, and the most Christian king,
Oswy, succeeded him in the throne, as we shall hereafter
relate, Diuma,<note place='foot'>Penda was killed in 655. Diuma was probably consecrated in
656.</note> one of the aforesaid four priests,
was made bishop of the Midland Angles, as also of the
Mercians, being ordained by Bishop Finan; for the
scarcity of priests made it necessary that one prelate
should be set over two nations. Having in a short time
gained many people to the Lord, he died among the
Midland Angles, in the country called Infeppingum;<note place='foot'>Not identified. Perhaps Repton (Reppington) in Derbyshire,
where it is supposed that Diuma had fixed his see. For the form
of the name, cf. II, 14, p. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, note 5.</note>
and Ceollach, also of the Scottish nation, succeeded
him in the bishopric. But he, not long after, left his
bishopric, and returned to the island of Hii,<note place='foot'>He probably returned at the time of the rebellion of Mercia in
658; <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi> For Hii, <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_III'>3</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi></note> which,
among the Scots, was the chief and head of many
monasteries. His successor in the bishopric was Trumhere,<note place='foot'>Abbot of Gilling. He was a kinsman of Oswin: <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> c. 24, p. <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>.</note>
a godly man, and trained in the monastic life,
an Englishman, but ordained bishop by the Scots. This
happened in the days of King Wulfhere, of whom we
shall speak hereafter.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_XXII'/>
<head>Chap. XXII. How under King Sigbert, through the
preaching of Cedd, the East Saxons again received the
faith, which they had before cast off. [653 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
At that time, also, the East Saxons, at the instance of
King Oswy, again received the faith, which they had
formerly cast off when they expelled Mellitus, their
bishop.<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_V'>II, 5</ref>. Since then, the East Saxons had remained pagan.</note> For Sigbert,<note place='foot'>Sometimes surnamed the <q>Good.</q> (He must not be confused
with Sigbert, King of the East Angles, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XV'>II, 15</ref>, and III, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XVIII'>18</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIX'>19</ref>.)
Sigbert the Little was the successor of the three young kings who
expelled Mellitus (<ref target='Book_II_Chap_V'>II, 5</ref>).</note> who reigned next to Sigbert surnamed
The Little, was then king of that nation, and a
friend to King Oswy, who, when Sigbert came to the
province of the Northumbrians to visit him, as he often
did, used to endeavour to convince him that those could
not be gods that had been made by the hands of men;
that a stock or a stone could not be proper matter to
form a god, the residue whereof was either burned in
the fire, or framed into any vessels for the use of men,
or else was cast out as refuse, trampled on and turned
into dust. That God is rather to be understood as incomprehensible
in majesty and invisible to human eyes,
almighty, eternal, the Creator of heaven and earth and
of mankind; Who governs and will judge the world in
righteousness, Whose eternal abode must be believed to
be in Heaven, and not in base and perishable metal; and
that it ought in reason to be concluded, that all those
who learn and do the will of Him by Whom they were
created, will receive from Him eternal rewards. King
Oswy having often, with friendly counsel, like a brother,
said this and much more to the like effect to King Sigbert,
at length, aided by the consent of his friends, he
believed, and after he had consulted with those about
him, and exhorted them, when they all agreed and
assented to the faith, he was baptized with them by
Bishop Finan, in the king's township above spoken of,
which is called At the Wall,<note place='foot'>C. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXI'>21</ref> and note.</note> because it is close by the
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
wall which the Romans formerly drew across the island
of Britain, at the distance of twelve miles from the
eastern sea.
</p>

<p>
King Sigbert, having now become a citizen of the
eternal kingdom, returned to the seat of his temporal
kingdom, requesting of King Oswy that he would give
him some teachers, to convert his nation to the faith of
Christ, and cleanse them in the fountain of salvation.
Wherefore Oswy, sending into the province of the
Midland Angles, summoned the man of God, Cedd,<note place='foot'>C. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXI'>21</ref> and note.</note>
and, giving him another priest for his companion, sent
them to preach the Word to the East Saxons. When
these two, travelling to all parts of that country, had
gathered a numerous Church to the Lord, it happened
once that Cedd returned home, and came to the church
of Lindisfarne to confer with Bishop Finan; who, finding
that the work of the Gospel had prospered in his
hands, made him bishop of the nation of the East
Saxons, calling to him two other bishops<note place='foot'>They must have been Celtic bishops, probably of the Irish
Church and subject to the authority of Iona. Cedd seems to have
had no fixed see. He is not called Bishop of London, like Mellitus.</note> to assist at
the ordination. Cedd, having received the episcopal
dignity, returned to his province, and pursuing the work
he had begun with more ample authority, built churches
in divers places, and ordained priests and deacons to
assist him in the Word of faith, and the ministry of
Baptism,<note place='foot'>Dr. Bright regards this organization as a foreshadowing of
the parochial system, which, however, was not thoroughly established
till long after.</note> especially in the city which, in the language of
the Saxons, is called Ythancaestir,<note place='foot'>Identified with the Roman military station, Othona, on the
Blackwater, formerly called the Pant, in Essex. The town is now
submerged.</note> as also in that which
is named Tilaburg.<note place='foot'>Tilbury.</note> The first of these places is on the
bank of the Pant, the other on the bank of the Thames.
In these, gathering a flock of Christ's servants, he
taught them to observe the discipline of a rule of life, as
far as those rude people were then capable of receiving it.
</p>

<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>

<p>
Whilst the teaching of the everlasting life was thus,
for no small time, making daily increase in that province
to the joy of the king and of all the people, it happened
that the king, at the instigation of the enemy of all good
men, was murdered by his own kindred. They were two
brothers who did this wicked deed; and being asked what
had moved them to it, they had nothing else to answer,
but that they had been incensed against the king, and
hated him, because he was too apt to spare his enemies,
and calmly forgave the wrongs they had done him, upon
their entreaty. Such was the crime for which the king
was killed, because he observed the precepts of the
Gospel with a devout heart; but in this innocent death
his real offence was also punished, according to the
prediction of the man of God. For one of those nobles<note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Comes.</foreign> A.S. <q>gesith.</q></note>
that murdered him was unlawfully married, and when
the bishop was not able to prevent or correct the sin, he
excommunicated him, and commanded all that would
give ear to him not to enter this man's house, nor to eat of
his meat. But the king made light of this command, and
being invited by the noble, went to a banquet at his house.
As he was going thence, the bishop met him. The king,
beholding him, immediately dismounted from his horse,
trembling, and fell down at his feet, begging pardon for
his offence; for the bishop, who was likewise on horseback,
had also alighted. Being much incensed, he
touched the prostrate king with the rod he held in his
hand, and spoke thus with the authority of his office:
<q>I tell thee, forasmuch as thou wouldest not refrain
from the house of that sinful and condemned man, thou
shalt die in that very house.</q> Yet it is to be believed,
that such a death of a religious man not only blotted
out his offence, but even added to his merit; because it
happened on account of his piety and his observance of
the commands of Christ.
</p>

<p>
Sigbert was succeeded in the kingdom by Suidhelm,<note place='foot'>He was his brother probably. But the relationships of these
East Saxon kings are very difficult to determine.</note>
the son of Sexbald, who was baptized by the same
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
Cedd, in the province of the East Angles, in the royal
township, called Rendlaesham,<note place='foot'>Rendlesham in Suffolk.</note> that is, Rendil's Dwelling;
and Ethelwald,<note place='foot'>Distinguish from Ethelwald, or Oidilwald, sub-King of Deira
(<hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIV'>14</ref>, and <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi> cc. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>). Ethelwald, King of the East
Angles, succeeded his brother, Ethelhere, who was the successor
of Anna (cf. <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi> cc. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>7</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XVIII'>18</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIX'>19</ref>), and was killed in the battle of the
Winwaed (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>).</note> king of the East Angles, brother to
Anna, king of the same people, received him as he came
forth from the holy font.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_XXIII'/>
<head>Chap. XXIII. How Bishop Cedd, having a place for
building a monastery given him by King Ethelwald,
consecrated it to the Lord with prayer and fasting; and
concerning his death. [659-664 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
The same man of God, whilst he was bishop among the
East Saxons, was also wont oftentimes to visit his own
province, Northumbria, for the purpose of exhortation.
Oidilwald,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIV'>14</ref>; <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>. Apparently he succeeded Oswin
as sub-King of Deira.</note> the son of King Oswald, who reigned among
the Deiri, finding him a holy, wise, and good man,
desired him to accept some land whereon to build a
monastery, to which the king himself might frequently
resort, to pray to the Lord and hear the Word, and where
he might be buried when he died; for he believed faithfully
that he should receive much benefit from the daily
prayers of those who were to serve the Lord in that
place. The king had before with him a brother of the
same bishop, called Caelin, a man no less devoted to
God, who, being a priest, was wont to administer to him
and his house the Word and the Sacraments of the faith;
by whose means he chiefly came to know and love the
bishop. So then, complying with the king's desires, the
Bishop chose himself a place whereon to build a monastery
among steep and distant mountains, which looked
more like lurking-places for robbers and dens of wild
beasts, than dwellings of men; to the end that, according
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
to the prophecy of Isaiah, <q>In the habitation of dragons,
where each lay, might be grass with reeds and rushes;</q><note place='foot'>Isaiah, xxxv, 7.</note>
that is, that the fruits of good works should spring up,
where before beasts were wont to dwell, or men to live
after the manner of beasts.
</p>

<p>
But the man of God, desiring first to cleanse the place
which he had received for the monastery from stain of
former crimes, by prayer and fasting, and so to lay the
foundations there, requested of the king that he would
give him opportunity and leave to abide there for prayer
all the time of Lent, which was at hand. All which
days, except Sundays, he prolonged his fast till the
evening, according to custom, and then took no other
sustenance than a small piece of bread, one hen's egg,
and a little milk and water. This, he said, was the
custom of those of whom he had learned the rule of
regular discipline, first to consecrate to the Lord, by
prayer and fasting, the places which they had newly
received for building a monastery or a church. When
there were ten days of Lent still remaining, there came
a messenger to call him to the king; and he, that the
holy work might not be intermitted, on account of the
king's affairs, entreated his priest, Cynibill, who was
also his own brother, to complete his pious undertaking.
Cynibill readily consented, and when the duty of fasting
and prayer was over, he there built the monastery, which
is now called Laestingaeu,<note place='foot'>Lastingham (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Preface'>Preface</ref>). Cedd was its first abbot, though it
was not in his own diocese.</note> and established therein religious
customs according to the use of Lindisfarne,
where he had been trained.
</p>

<p>
When Cedd had for many years held the office of
bishop in the aforesaid province, and also taken charge
of this monastery, over which he placed provosts,<note place='foot'>Doubtless only one at a time. The <q>Provost</q> is the prior of
later times. The charge of the monastery would devolve upon him
while Cedd was absent in his diocese.</note> it
happened that he came thither at a time when there was
plague, and fell sick and died. He was first buried
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
without the walls; but in the process of time a church
was built of stone in the monastery, in honour of the
Blessed Mother of God, and his body was laid in it, on
the right side of the altar.
</p>

<p>
The bishop left the monastery to be governed after
him by his brother Ceadda,<note place='foot'>Or, as he is commonly called, St. Chad, the greatest of this
remarkable group of brothers; <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Preface'>Preface</ref> and <hi rend='italic'>infra passim</hi>.</note> who was afterwards made
bishop, as shall be told hereafter. For, as it rarely
happens, the four brothers we have mentioned, Cedd
and Cynibill, and Caelin and Ceadda, were all celebrated
priests of the Lord, and two of them also came to be
bishops. When the brethren who were in his monastery,
in the province of the East Saxons,<note place='foot'>Ythancaestir, or Tilbury (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXII'>22</ref>).</note> heard that the
bishop was dead and buried in the province of the
Northumbrians, about thirty men of that monastery
came thither, being desirous either to live near the
body of their father, if it should please God, or to die
and be buried there. Being gladly received by their
brethren and fellow soldiers in Christ, all of them died
there struck down by the aforesaid pestilence, except
one little boy, who is known to have been saved from
death by the prayers of his spiritual father. For being
alive long after, and giving himself to the reading of
Scripture, he was told that he had not been regenerated
by the water of Baptism, and being then cleansed in
the laver of salvation, he was afterwards promoted to the
order of priesthood, and was of service to many in the
church. I do not doubt that he was delivered at the
point of death, as I have said, by the intercession of
his father, to whose body he had come for love of him,
that so he might himself avoid eternal death, and by
teaching, offer the ministry of life and salvation to others
of the brethren.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'/>
<head>Chap. XXIV. How when King Penda was slain, the
province of the Mercians received the faith of Christ,
and Oswy gave possessions and territories to God, for
building monasteries, as a thank offering for the victory
obtained. [655 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
At this time, King Oswy was exposed to the cruel and
intolerable invasions of Penda, king of the Mercians,
whom we have so often mentioned, and who had slain
his brother;<note place='foot'>Oswald; <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_IX'>9</ref>.</note> at length, compelled by his necessity, he
promised to give him countless gifts and royal marks of
honour greater than can be believed, to purchase peace;
provided that he would return home, and cease to waste
and utterly destroy the provinces of his kingdom. The
pagan king refused to grant his request, for he had
resolved to blot out and extirpate all his nation, from
the highest to the lowest; whereupon King Oswy had
recourse to the protection of the Divine pity for deliverance
from his barbarous and pitiless foe, and binding
himself by a vow, said, <q>If the pagan will not
accept our gifts, let us offer them to Him that will,
the Lord our God.</q> He then vowed, that if he should
win the victory, he would dedicate his daughter to the
Lord in holy virginity, and give twelve pieces of land
whereon to build monasteries. After this he gave battle
with a very small army: indeed, it is reported that the
pagans had thirty times the number of men; for they
had thirty legions, drawn up under most noted commanders.<note place='foot'><q>Ealdormen,</q> Green, <q>Making of England,</q> p. 301. But they
probably included many British chiefs (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Nennius, and cf. <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>
<q>duces regii</q>).</note>
King Oswy and his son Alchfrid met them
with a very small army, as has been said, but trusting
in Christ as their Leader; his other son, Egfrid,<note place='foot'>Oswy's younger son. He succeeded his father in 670 or 671 (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi>
<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_V'>IV, 5</ref>, and for the events of his reign, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_V'>IV, V</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>).</note> was
then kept as a hostage at the court of Queen Cynwise,<note place='foot'>The wife of Penda.</note>
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
in the province of the Mercians. King Oswald's son
Oidilwald,<note place='foot'>Cc. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIV'>14</ref> and <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>. The reason for his conduct is not explained.
Probably he had hoped to establish his claims on Northumbria
through Penda's assistance, but shrank from actually fighting
against his country.</note> who ought to have supported them, was on
the enemy's side, and led them on to fight against his
country and his uncle; though, during the battle, he withdrew,
and awaited the event in a place of safety. The
engagement began, the pagans were put to flight or
killed, the thirty royal commanders, who had come to
Penda's assistance, were almost all of them slain; among
whom was Ethelhere,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXII'>22</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>, note. How he gave occasion for the war is
not known.</note> brother and successor to Anna,
king of the East Angles. He had been the occasion of
the war, and was now killed, having lost his army
and auxiliaries. The battle was fought near the river
Winwaed,<note place='foot'>The river has not been identified, and there is great uncertainty
even with regard to the district. Below, Bede says that Oswy
concluded the war in the district of <q>Loidis,</q> by which he must
mean Leeds, as in <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XIV'>II, 14</ref>, and most commentators adopt this view.
In this case, the river may be the Aire, or more probably the
Went, a tributary of the Don. Others believe the district to be the
Lothians, following the account in Nennius, who describes Oswy
as taking refuge before the battle in a city called Iudeu, supposed
to be either Edinburgh or Carriden (cf. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XII'>I, 12</ref>, note), and
the river has been supposed to be the Avon in Linlithgow.</note> which then, owing to the great rains, was in
flood, and had overflowed its banks, so that many more
were drowned in the flight than destroyed in battle by
the sword.
</p>

<p>
Then King Oswy, according to the vow he had made to
the Lord, returned thanks to God for the victory granted
him, and gave his daughter Elfled,<note place='foot'>She is mentioned as joint-abbess with her mother, Eanfled, of
the monastery of Whitby (<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVI'>IV, 26</ref>). Eddius calls her <q>sapientissima
virgo,</q> <q>semper totius provinciae consolatrix optimaque consiliatrix.</q>
Her influence helped to restore Wilfrid to the bishopric.
She was the friend of St. Cuthbert, who is said to have wrought a
miraculous cure on her behalf. It was to her that he prophesied
the death of her brother Egfrid (IV, 26, p. <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, note).</note> who was scarce a
year old, to be consecrated to Him in perpetual virginity;
bestowing also twelve small estates of land, wherein the
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
practice of earthly warfare should cease, and place and
means should be afforded to devout and zealous monks
to wage spiritual warfare, and pray for the eternal peace
of his nation. Of these estates six were in the province
of the Deiri, and the other six in that of the Bernicians.
Each of the estates contained ten families, that is, a
hundred and twenty in all. The aforesaid daughter of
King Oswy, who was to be dedicated to God, entered
the monastery called Heruteu,<note place='foot'>Hartlepool in the county of Durham (cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIII'>IV, 23</ref>).</note> or, <q>The Island of the
Hart,</q> at that time ruled by the Abbess Hilda,<note place='foot'>For the main facts of her life, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIII'>IV, 23</ref>. She was Abbess of
Whitby at the time of the Synod (c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXV'>25</ref>).</note> who,
two years after, having acquired an estate of ten
families, at the place called Streanaeshalch,<note place='foot'>Whitby. It was a mixed monastery (cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIII'>IV, 23</ref>).</note> built a
monastery there, in which the aforesaid king's daughter
was first trained in the monastic life and afterwards
became abbess; till, at the age of fifty-nine, the blessed
virgin departed to be united to her Heavenly Bridegroom.
In this monastery, she and her father, Oswy, her mother,
Eanfled, her mother's father, Edwin,<note place='foot'>The ancient life of Gregory the Great, by a monk of Whitby,
tells how Edwin's body was translated thither from the place where
he fell. For the fate of his head, cf. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XX'>II, 20</ref>.</note> and many other
noble persons, are buried in the church of the holy
Apostle Peter. King Oswy concluded this war in the
district of Loidis, in the thirteenth year of his reign, on
the 15th of November,<note place='foot'>In 655: cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>V, 24</ref> (death of Penda).</note> to the great benefit of both
nations; for he delivered his own people from the hostile
depredations of the pagans, and, having made an end of
their heathen chief, converted the Mercians and the
adjacent provinces to the grace of the Christian faith.
</p>

<p>
Diuma was made the first bishop of the Mercians, as
also of Lindsey and the Midland Angles, as has been
said above,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXI'>21</ref>, where, however, Lindsey is not mentioned. For the
successive conquests of Lindsey by Northumbria and Mercia,
<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> IV, 12, p. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, note. Though it must have passed to Northumbria
after Oswy's victory, it was still apparently included in the Mercian
diocese.</note> and he died and was buried among the
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
Midland Angles. The second was Ceollach,<note place='foot'>C. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXI'>21</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi> and note. <q>Scottia,</q> as usual, means Ireland,
which includes Iona (cf. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_IV'>II, 4</ref>).</note> who, giving
up his episcopal office before his death, returned into
Scotland. Both these bishops belonged to the nation of
the Scots. The third was Trumhere, an Englishman,
but educated and ordained by the Scots. He was abbot
of the monastery that is called Ingetlingum,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIV'>14</ref>.</note> and is the
place where King Oswin was killed, as has been said
above; for Queen Eanfled, his kinswoman, in expiation
of his unjust death, begged of King Oswy that he would
give Trumhere, the aforesaid servant of God, a place
there to build a monastery, because he also was kinsman
to the slaughtered king; in which monastery continual
prayers should be offered up for the eternal welfare of
the kings, both of him that was murdered, and of him
that commanded the murder. The same King Oswy
governed the Mercians, as also the people of the other
southern provinces, three years after he had slain King
Penda; and he likewise subdued the greater part of the
Picts to the dominion of the English.
</p>

<p>
At this time he gave to the above-mentioned Peada,
son to King Penda, because he was his kinsman, the
kingdom of the Southern Mercians,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, he confirmed Peada in the government conferred on him
by his father, Penda, if we may assume the Southern Mercians to
be identical with the Middle Angles: cf. c. 21, p. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>.</note> consisting, as is
said, of 5,000 families, divided by the river Trent from
the Northern Mercians, whose land contains 7,000
families; but Peada was foully slain in the following
spring, by the treachery, as is said, of his wife,<note place='foot'>Alchfled, Oswy's daughter: <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi></note> during
the very time of the Easter festival. Three years after
the death of King Penda, the Mercian chiefs, Immin,
and Eafa, and Eadbert, rebelled against King Oswy,
setting up for their king, Wulfhere,<note place='foot'>He has been already mentioned, cc. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>7</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXI'>21</ref>. He was a vigorous
ruler; he freed Mercia from Northumbria, reconquered Lindsey,
established his supremacy over the East Saxons (cf. c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXX'>30</ref>), and
curtailed the power of Wessex. His attempt, however, to extend
his power to the north of the Humber ended in 675 in his disastrous
defeat by Egfrid, King of Northumbria (<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>IV, 12</ref>) and his death
followed immediately after. He was the first Christian king of all
Mercia, and he was zealous in putting down idolatry (Florence of
Worcester).</note> son to the said
Penda, a youth whom they had kept concealed; and
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
expelling the ealdormen of the foreign king, they bravely
recovered at once their liberty and their lands; and being
thus free, together with their king, they rejoiced to serve
Christ the true King, for the sake of an everlasting
kingdom in heaven. This king governed the Mercians
seventeen years, and had for his first bishop Trumhere,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi> and c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXI'>21</ref>.</note>
above spoken of; the second was Jaruman;<note place='foot'>He succeeded in 662. Cf. c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXX'>30</ref>.</note> the third
Ceadda;<note place='foot'>C. 23, p. <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>, and note.</note> the fourth Wynfrid.<note place='foot'>IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_III'>3</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_V'>5</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_VI'>6</ref>. He was deposed by Theodore for some act of
disobedience not known (<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_VI'>IV, 6</ref>), and went to the Continent, where,
travelling in Neustria, he was mistaken for Wilfrid and cruelly ill-treated
by the emissaries of Ebroin (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>V, 19</ref>, note), <q>errore bono
unius syllabae seducti,</q> as Eddius, the biographer of Wilfrid,
remarks.</note> All these, succeeding
each other in order under King Wulfhere, discharged
episcopal duties to the Mercian nation.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_XXV'/>
<head>Chap. XXV. How the question arose about the due time
of keeping Easter, with those that came out of Scotland.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, Ireland.</note>
[664 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the meantime, Bishop Aidan being taken away from
this life, Finan, who was ordained and sent by the
Scots, succeeded him in the bishopric, and built a church
in the Isle of Lindisfarne, fit for the episcopal see;
nevertheless, after the manner of the Scots, he made it,
not of stone, but entirely of hewn oak, and covered it
with reeds; and it was afterwards dedicated in honour
of the blessed Peter the Apostle, by the most reverend
Archbishop Theodore. Eadbert,<note place='foot'>He succeeded Cuthbert as Bishop of Lindisfarne; <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIX'>29</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXX'>30</ref>.</note> also bishop of that
place, took off the thatch, and caused it to be covered
entirely, both roof and walls, with plates of lead.
</p>

<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>

<p>
At this time, a great and frequently debated question
arose about the observance of Easter;<note place='foot'>Cf. II, 2, p. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, note 3.</note> those that came
from Kent or Gaul affirming, that the Scots celebrated
Easter Sunday contrary to the custom of the universal
Church. Among them was a most zealous defender of
the true Easter, whose name was Ronan,<note place='foot'>Nothing certain is known of him.</note> a Scot by
nation, but instructed in the rule of ecclesiastical truth
in Gaul or Italy. Disputing with Finan, he convinced
many, or at least induced them to make a more strict
inquiry after the truth; yet he could not prevail upon
Finan, but, on the contrary, embittered him the more
by reproof, and made him a professed opponent of the
truth, for he was of a violent temper. James,<note place='foot'>II, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XVI'>16</ref>, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XX'>20</ref>; <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_II'>IV, 2</ref>.</note> formerly
the deacon of the venerable Archbishop Paulinus, as has
been said above, observed the true and Catholic Easter,
with all those that he could instruct in the better way.
Queen Eanfled and her followers also observed it as she
had seen it practised in Kent, having with her a Kentish
priest who followed the Catholic observance, whose
name was Romanus. Thus it is said to have sometimes
happened in those times that Easter was twice celebrated
in one year; and that when the king, having ended his
fast, was keeping Easter, the queen and her followers
were still fasting, and celebrating Palm Sunday. Whilst
Aidan lived, this difference about the observance of
Easter was patiently tolerated by all men, for they well
knew, that though he could not keep Easter contrary to
the custom of those who had sent him, yet he industriously
laboured to practise the works of faith, piety,
and love, according to the custom of all holy men; for
which reason he was deservedly beloved by all, even by
those who differed in opinion concerning Easter, and
was held in veneration, not only by less important persons,
but even by the bishops, Honorius of Canterbury,
and Felix of the East Angles.
</p>

<p>
But after the death of Finan, who succeeded him,
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
when Colman, who was also sent from Scotland,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, Iona: cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_IV'>IV, 4</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi> Colman succeeded in 661.</note> came
to be bishop, a greater controversy arose about the
observance of Easter, and other rules of ecclesiastical
life. Whereupon this question began naturally to influence
the thoughts and hearts of many who feared,
lest haply, having received the name of Christians, they
might run, or have run, in vain. This reached the ears
of the rulers, King Oswy and his son Alchfrid. Now
Oswy, having been instructed and baptized by the
Scots, and being very perfectly skilled in their language,
thought nothing better than what they taught; but
Alchfrid, having for his teacher in Christianity the
learned Wilfrid,<note place='foot'>For his life: <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>V, 19</ref>.</note> who had formerly gone to Rome to
study ecclesiastical doctrine, and spent much time at
Lyons with Dalfinus,<note place='foot'>Really Annemundus. He was Archbishop of Lyons. Cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_VIII'>V, 8</ref>,
note on Godwin. He is confused with his brother Dalfinus, Count
of Lyons: <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> V, 19, p. <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>, note.</note> archbishop of Gaul, from whom
also he had received the crown of ecclesiastical tonsure,
rightly thought that this man's doctrine ought to be
preferred before all the traditions of the Scots. For this
reason he had also given him a monastery of forty
families, at a place called Inhrypum;<note place='foot'>Ripon. For the preposition, cf. II, 14, p. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, note 5. The
monastery was first given to Eata (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVI'>26</ref>), to be organized by
him, and among the monks he brought with him from Melrose was
Cuthbert (cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVII'>IV, 27</ref>). They were forced to retire in 661, but after
the Synod of Whitby they conformed to the Catholic rules.</note> which place, not
long before, he had given for a monastery to those that
were followers of the Scots; but forasmuch as they afterwards,
being left to their choice, preferred to quit the
place rather than alter their custom, he gave it to him,
whose life and doctrine were worthy of it.
</p>

<p>
Agilbert, bishop of the West Saxons,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>7</ref>, where Bede's summary account obscures the sequence
of events. Here he is still called Bishop of the West Saxons. It
is probable that he had retired from Wessex by this time, but had
not yet gone to Gaul. He did not become Bishop of Paris before
666, for in that year we find his predecessor, Importunus, witnessing
a <q>privilegium</q> for a nunnery at Soissons.</note> above-mentioned,
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
a friend of King Alchfrid and of Abbot Wilfrid,
had at that time come into the province of the Northumbrians,
and was staying some time among them; at
the request of Alchfrid, he made Wilfrid a priest in his
aforesaid monastery. He had in his company a priest,
whose name was Agatho.<note place='foot'>We hear nothing more of this priest.</note> The question being raised
there concerning Easter and the tonsure and other
ecclesiastical matters, it was arranged, that a synod
should be held in the monastery of Streanaeshalch,<note place='foot'>C. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>. The etymology is generally considered impossible. But
cf. Bright, <q>Early English Church History,</q> p. 213.</note> which
signifies the Bay of the Lighthouse, where the Abbess
Hilda,<note place='foot'>C. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>. After the Synod it appears that she conformed to the
Catholic usages. But she continued to be an opponent of Wilfrid
till the end of her life.</note> a woman devoted to the service of God, then
ruled; and that there this question should be decided.
The kings, both father and son, came thither, and the
bishops, Colman with his Scottish clerks, and Agilbert
with the priests Agatho and Wilfrid. James and Romanus
were on their side; but the Abbess Hilda and
her followers were for the Scots, as was also the venerable
Bishop Cedd,<note place='foot'>Cc. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXI'>21</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXII'>22</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>.</note> long before ordained by the Scots, as
has been said above, and he acted in that council as a
most careful interpreter for both parties.
</p>

<p>
King Oswy first made an opening speech, in which
he said that it behoved those who served one God to
observe one rule of life; and as they all expected the
same kingdom in heaven, so they ought not to differ in
the celebration of the heavenly mysteries; but rather to
inquire which was the truer tradition, that it might be
followed by all in common; he then commanded his
bishop, Colman, first to declare what the custom was
which he observed, and whence it derived its origin.
Then Colman said, <q>The Easter which I keep, I received
from my elders, who sent me hither as bishop;
all our forefathers, men beloved of God, are known to
have celebrated it after the same manner; and that it
may not seem to any contemptible and worthy to be
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
rejected, it is the same which the blessed John the
Evangelist, the disciple specially beloved of our Lord,
with all the churches over which he presided, is recorded
to have celebrated.</q><note place='foot'>The practice of the churches of Asia, traditionally derived
from St. John, was to disregard the day of the week and observe
as Easter Day the 14th of the month Nisan. Therefore the claim
to the authority of St. John, advanced by the Celts, was inaccurate
and gives some colour to the charge, often brought against them,
of being <q>Quartodecimans.</q></note> When he had said thus much, and
more to the like effect, the king commanded Agilbert to
make known the manner of his observance and to show
whence it was derived, and on what authority he followed
it. Agilbert answered, <q>I beseech you, let my disciple,
the priest Wilfrid, speak in my stead; because we both
concur with the other followers of the ecclesiastical
tradition that are here present, and he can better and
more clearly explain our opinion in the English language,
than I can by an interpreter.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then Wilfrid, being ordered by the king to speak,
began thus:&mdash;<q>The Easter which we keep, we saw
celebrated by all at Rome, where the blessed Apostles,
Peter and Paul, lived, taught, suffered, and were buried;
we saw the same done by all in Italy and in Gaul, when
we travelled through those countries for the purpose of
study and prayer. We found it observed in Africa, Asia,
Egypt, Greece, and all the world, wherever the Church
of Christ is spread abroad, among divers nations and
tongues, at one and the same time; save only among
these and their accomplices in obstinacy, I mean the
Picts and the Britons, who foolishly, in these two remote
islands of the ocean, and only in part even of them,
strive to oppose all the rest of the world.</q> When he
had so said, Colman answered, <q>It is strange that you
choose to call our efforts foolish, wherein we follow the
example of so great an Apostle, who was thought worthy
to lean on our Lord's bosom, when all the world knows
him to have lived most wisely.</q> Wilfrid replied, <q rend='pre'>Far
be it from us to charge John with folly, for he literally
observed the precepts of the Mosaic Law, whilst the
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
Church was still Jewish in many points, and the Apostles,
lest they should give cause of offence to the Jews who
were among the Gentiles, were not able at once to cast
off all the observances of the Law which had been instituted
by God, in the same way as it is necessary that
all who come to the faith should forsake the idols which
were invented by devils. For this reason it was, that
Paul circumcised Timothy,<note place='foot'>Acts, xvi, 3.</note> that he offered sacrifice in
the temple,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, xxi, 26.</note> that he shaved his head with Aquila and
Priscilla at Corinth;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, xviii, 18.</note> for no other advantage than to
avoid giving offence to the Jews. Hence it was, that
James said to the same Paul, <q>Thou seest, brother, how
many thousands of Jews there are which believe; and
they are all zealous of the Law.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, xxi, 20.</note> And yet, at this time,
when the light of the Gospel is spreading throughout
the world, it is needless, nay, it is not lawful, for the
faithful either to be circumcised, or to offer up to God
sacrifices of flesh. So John, according to the custom of
the Law, began the celebration of the feast of Easter, on
the fourteenth day of the first month, in the evening,
not regarding whether the same happened on a Saturday,
or any other week-day. But when Peter preached
at Rome, being mindful that our Lord arose from the
dead, and gave to the world the hope of resurrection, on
the first day of the week, he perceived that Easter ought
to be kept after this manner: he always awaited the rising
of the moon on the fourteenth day of the first month in
the evening, according to the custom and precepts of
the Law, even as John did. And when that came, if the
Lord's day, then called the first day of the week, was
the next day, he began that very evening to celebrate
Easter, as we all do at the present time. But if the
Lord's day did not fall the next morning after the fourteenth
moon, but on the sixteenth, or the seventeenth,
or any other moon till the twenty-first, he waited for
that, and on the Saturday before, in the evening, began
to observe the holy solemnity of Easter. Thus it came
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
to pass, that Easter Sunday was only kept from the
fifteenth moon to the twenty-first. Nor does this evangelical
and apostolic tradition abolish the Law, but rather
fulfil it; the command being to keep the passover from
the fourteenth moon of the first month in the evening
to the twenty-first moon of the same month in the evening;
which observance all the successors of the blessed
John in Asia, since his death, and all the Church throughout
the world, have since followed; and that this is the
true Easter, and the only one to be celebrated by the
faithful, was not newly decreed by the council of Nicaea,
but only confirmed afresh; as the history of the Church
informs us.<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XIX'>II, 19</ref>, note.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Thus it is plain, that you, Colman, neither follow
the example of John, as you imagine, nor that of Peter,
whose tradition you oppose with full knowledge, and
that you neither agree with the Law nor the Gospel in
the keeping of your Easter. For John, keeping the
Paschal time according to the decree of the Mosaic Law,
had no regard to the first day of the week, which you do
not practise, seeing that you celebrate Easter only on
the first day after the Sabbath. Peter celebrated Easter
Sunday between the fifteenth and the twenty-first moon,
which you do not practise, seeing that you observe
Easter Sunday from the fourteenth to the twentieth
moon; so that you often begin Easter on the thirteenth
moon in the evening, whereof neither the Law made any
mention, nor did our Lord, the Author and Giver of the
Gospel, on that day either eat the old passover in the
evening, or deliver the Sacraments of the New Testament,
to be celebrated by the Church, in memory of His
Passion, but on the fourteenth. Besides, in your celebration
of Easter, you utterly exclude the twenty-first
moon, which the Law ordered to be specially observed.
Thus, as I have said before, you agree neither with John
nor Peter, nor with the Law, nor the Gospel, in the
celebration of the greatest festival.</q>
</p>

<p>
To this Colman rejoined: <q>Did the holy Anatolius,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_III'>3</ref>, note.</note>
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
much commended in the history of the Church, judge
contrary to the Law and the Gospel, when he wrote, that
Easter was to be celebrated from the fourteenth to the
twentieth moon? Is it to be believed that our most
reverend Father Columba and his successors, men beloved
by God, who kept Easter after the same manner,
judged or acted contrary to the Divine writings? Whereas
there were many among them, whose sanctity was
attested by heavenly signs and miracles which they
wrought; whom I, for my part, doubt not to be saints,
and whose life, customs, and discipline I never cease to
follow.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It is evident,</q> said Wilfrid, <q rend='pre'>that Anatolius was a
most holy, learned, and commendable man; but what
have you to do with him, since you do not observe his
decrees? For he undoubtedly, following the rule of truth
in his Easter, appointed a cycle of nineteen years, which
either you are ignorant of, or if you know it, though it
is kept by the whole Church of Christ, yet you despise it
as a thing of naught. He so computed the fourteenth
moon in our Lord's Paschal Feast, that according to the
custom of the Egyptians, he acknowledged it to be the
fifteenth moon on that same day in the evening; so in
like manner he assigned the twentieth to Easter-Sunday,
as believing that to be the twenty-first moon, when the
sun had set. That you are ignorant of the rule of this
distinction is proved by this, that you sometimes manifestly
keep Easter before the full moon, that is, on the
thirteenth day. Concerning your Father Columba and
his followers, whose sanctity you say you imitate, and
whose rule and precepts confirmed by signs from Heaven
you say that you follow, I might answer, then when
many, in the day of judgement, shall say to our Lord,
that in His name they have prophesied, and have cast
out devils, and done many wonderful works, our Lord
will reply, that He never knew them. But far be it from
me to speak thus of your fathers, for it is much more
just to believe good than evil of those whom we know
not. Wherefore I do not deny those also to have been
God's servants, and beloved of God, who with rude
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
simplicity, but pious intentions, have themselves loved
Him. Nor do I think that such observance of Easter
did them much harm, as long as none came to show
them a more perfect rule to follow; for assuredly I
believe that, if any teacher, reckoning after the Catholic
manner, had come among them, they would have as
readily followed his admonitions, as they are known to
have kept those commandments of God, which they had
learned and knew.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But as for you and your companions, you certainly
sin, if, having heard the decrees of the Apostolic see, nay,
of the universal Church, confirmed, as they are, by Holy
Scripture, you scorn to follow them; for, though your
fathers were holy, do you think that those few men, in
a corner of the remotest island, are to be preferred before
the universal Church of Christ throughout the world?
And if that Columba of yours, (and, I may say, ours
also, if he was Christ's servant,) was a holy man and
powerful in miracles, yet could he be preferred before
the most blessed chief of the Apostles, to whom our
Lord said, <q>Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will
build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it, and I will give unto thee the keys of the
kingdom of Heaven?</q></q><note place='foot'>St. Matt., xvi, 18-19.</note>
</p>

<p>
When Wilfrid had ended thus, the king said, <q>Is it
true, Colman, that these words were spoken to Peter by
our Lord?</q> He answered, <q>It is true, O king!</q> Then
said he, <q>Can you show any such power given to your
Columba?</q> Colman answered, <q>None.</q> Then again
the king asked, <q>Do you both agree in this, without
any controversy, that these words were said above all to
Peter, and that the keys of the kingdom of Heaven were
given to him by our Lord?</q> They both answered,
<q>Yes.</q> Then the king concluded, <q>And I also say
unto you, that he is the door-keeper, and I will not
gainsay him, but I desire, as far as I know and am able,
in all things to obey his laws, lest haply when I come to
the gates of the kingdom of Heaven, there should be
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
none to open them, he being my adversary who is
proved to have the keys.</q> The king having said this, all
who were seated there or standing by, both great and
small, gave their assent, and renouncing the less perfect
custom, hastened to conform to that which they had
found to be better.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_XXVI'/>
<head>Chap. XXVI. How Colman, being worsted, returned
home; and Tuda succeeded him in the bishopric; and of
the state of the church under those teachers. [664 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
The disputation being ended, and the assembly broken
up, Agilbert returned home. Colman, perceiving that
his doctrine was rejected, and his party despised, took
with him those who wished to follow him, to wit, such
as would not accept the Catholic Easter and the tonsure
in the form of a crown,<note place='foot'>Cf. II, 2, p. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, note 1.</note> (for there was no small dispute
about that also,) and went back into Scotland,<note place='foot'>To Iona; <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_IV'>IV, 4</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi></note> to consult
with his people what was to be done in this case.
Cedd, forsaking the practices of the Scots, returned to
his bishopric, having submitted to the Catholic observance
of Easter. This debate took place in the year of
our Lord 664, which was the twenty-second year of the
reign of King Oswy, and the thirtieth of the episcopate
of the Scots among the English; for Aidan was bishop
seventeen years, Finan ten, and Colman three.
</p>

<p>
When Colman had gone back into his own country,
Tuda, the servant of Christ, was made bishop of the
Northumbrians<note place='foot'>Fourth Bishop of Lindisfarne and the last of the Irish bishops
in that see. He died of the plague in 664: <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVII'>27</ref>.</note> in his place, having been instructed and
ordained bishop among the Southern Scots, having also
the crown of the ecclesiastical tonsure, according to the
custom of that province, and observing the Catholic rule
with regard to the time of Easter.<note place='foot'>Cf. c. 3, p. <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, and note.</note> He was a good and
religious man, but he governed the church a very short
time; he had come from Scotland<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, Ireland.</note> whilst Colman was
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
yet bishop, and, both by word and deed, diligently
taught all men those things that appertain to the faith
and truth. But Eata,<note place='foot'>IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>12</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVII'>27</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVIII'>28</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_II'>V, 2</ref>.</note> who was abbot of the monastery
called Mailros,<note place='foot'>Old Melrose, <q>Quod Tuidi fluminis circumflexu maxima ex
parte clauditur,</q> <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XII'>V, 12</ref>. The more famous monastery is of later
date and is to the west of the older site.</note> a man most reverend and gentle, was
appointed abbot over the brethren that chose to remain
in the church of Lindisfarne, when the Scots went away.
It is said that Colman, upon his departure, requested
and obtained this of King Oswy, because Eata was one
of Aidan's twelve boys of the English nation,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_III'>3</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi> (where, however, there is only a general allusion
to the instruction of English children). It has been suggested
that they may have been redeemed from slavery. Cf.
c. 5, p. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>.</note> whom he
received in the early years of his episcopate, to be instructed
in Christ; for the king greatly loved Bishop
Colman on account of his innate discretion. This is that
Eata, who, not long after, was made bishop of the same
church of Lindisfarne. Colman carried home with him
part of the bones of the most reverend Father Aidan,
and left part of them in the church where he had presided,
ordering them to be interred in the sacristy.
</p>

<p>
The place which they governed shows how frugal
and temperate he and his predecessors were, for there
were very few houses besides the church found at their
departure; indeed, no more than were barely sufficient to
make civilized life possible; they had also no money,
but only cattle; for if they received any money from rich
persons, they immediately gave it to the poor; there
being no need to gather money, or provide houses for
the entertainment of the great men of the world; for
such never resorted to the church, except to pray and
hear the Word of God. The king himself, when occasion
required, came only with five or six servants, and
having performed his devotions in the church, departed.
But if they happened to take a repast there, they were
satisfied with the plain, daily food of the brethren, and
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
required no more. For the whole care of those teachers
was to serve God, not the world&mdash;to feed the soul, and
not the belly.
</p>

<p>
For this reason the religious habit was at that time
held in great veneration; so that wheresoever any clerk
or monk went, he was joyfully received by all men, as
God's servant; and even if they chanced to meet him
upon the way, they ran to him, and with bowed head,
were glad to be signed with the cross by his hand, or
blessed by his lips. Great attention was also paid to
their exhortations; and on Sundays they flocked eagerly
to the church, or the monasteries, not to feed their
bodies, but to hear the Word of God; and if any priest
happened to come into a village, the inhabitants came
together and asked of him the Word of life; for the
priests and clerks went to the villages for no other reason
than to preach, baptize, visit the sick, and, in a word,
to take care of souls; and they were so purified from all
taint of avarice, that none of them received lands and
possessions for building monasteries, unless they were
compelled to do so by the temporal authorities; which
custom was for some time after universally observed in
the churches of the Northumbrians. But enough has
now been said on this subject.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_XXVII'/>
<head>Chap. XXVII. How Egbert, a holy man of the English
nation, led a monastic life in Ireland. [664 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the same year of our Lord 664, there happened an
eclipse of the sun, on the third day of May,<note place='foot'>Really on the 1st.</note> about the
tenth hour of the day. In the same year, a sudden
pestilence<note place='foot'>Called the <q>Yellow Pest</q> from the colour of its victims. It
was a bubonic plague; it probably came from the East and was
the same as that which raged in Europe in Justinian's reign.
There were several outbreaks in England in the seventh century,
but this was the most virulent. For subsequent visitations, cf. IV,
<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_VII'>7</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIV'>14</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIX'>19</ref>.</note> depopulated first the southern parts of
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
Britain, and afterwards attacking the province of the
Northumbrians, ravaged the country far and near, and
destroyed a great multitude of men. By this plague the
aforesaid priest of the Lord, Tuda,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. 26, p. <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>.</note> was carried off, and
was honourably buried in the monastery called Paegnalaech.<note place='foot'>The Saxon Chronicle has <q>on Wagele,</q> which is supposed to
be Whalley, on the borders of Lancashire, Cheshire, and Yorkshire,
but the name varies greatly in different chroniclers. Smith
considers that Bede's form <q>Paegnalaech</q> or <q>Paegnalech</q>
points to Finchale (Wincanheale, in Simeon of Durham, or Pincahala),
near Durham.</note>
Moreover, this plague prevailed no less disastrously
in the island of Ireland. Many of the nobility,
and of the lower ranks of the English nation, were
there at that time, who, in the days of the Bishops
Finan and Colman, forsaking their native island, retired
thither, either for the sake of sacred studies, or of a
more ascetic life; and some of them presently devoted
themselves faithfully to a monastic life, others chose
rather to apply themselves to study, going about from
one master's cell to another. The Scots willingly received
them all, and took care to supply them with daily
food without cost, as also to furnish them with books
for their studies, and teaching free of charge.
</p>

<p>
Among these were Ethelhun and Egbert,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_IV'>4</ref>.</note> two youths
of great capacity, of the English nobility. The former
of whom was brother to Ethelwin,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XI'>11</ref>; <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>IV, 12</ref>.</note> a man no less beloved
by God, who also at a later time went over into
Ireland to study, and having been well instructed, returned
into his own country, and being made bishop in the
province of Lindsey, long and nobly governed the Church.
These two being in the monastery which in the language
of the Scots is called Rathmelsigi,<note place='foot'>Said, on doubtful authority, to be Melfont, or Mellifont, in
County Louth.</note> and having lost all
their companions, who were either cut off by the plague,
or dispersed into other places, were both seized by the
same sickness, and grievously afflicted. Of these, Egbert,
(as I was informed by a priest venerable for his
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
age, and of great veracity, who declared he had heard
the story from his own lips,) concluding that he was
at the point of death, went out of the chamber, where
the sick lay, in the morning, and sitting alone in a fitting
place, began seriously to reflect upon his past actions,
and, being full of compunction at the remembrance of
his sins, bedewed his face with tears, and prayed fervently
to God that he might not die yet, before he could
forthwith more fully make amends for the careless
offences which he had committed in his boyhood and
infancy, or might further exercise himself in good works.
He also made a vow that he would spend all his life abroad
and never return into the island of Britain, where he was
born; that besides singing the psalms at the canonical
hours, he would, unless prevented by bodily infirmity,
repeat the whole Psalter daily to the praise of God; and
that he would every week fast one whole day and night.
Returning home, after his tears and prayers and vows,
he found his companion asleep; and going to bed himself,
he began to compose himself to rest. When he
had lain quiet awhile, his comrade awaking, looked
on him, and said, <q>Alas! Brother Egbert, what have
you done? I was in hopes that we should have entered
together into life everlasting; but know that your prayer
is granted.</q> For he had learned in a vision what the
other had requested, and that he had obtained his
request.
</p>

<p>
In brief, Ethelhun died the next night; but Egbert,
throwing off his sickness, recovered and lived a long
time after to grace the episcopal office, which he received,
by deeds worthy of it;<note place='foot'><q>Acceptum sacerdotii gradum,</q> A.S. <q>biscophade onfeng</q> =
he received the episcopate. Cf. c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_IV'>4</ref>, note.</note> and blessed with many
virtues, according to his desire, lately, in the year of
our Lord 729, being ninety years of age, he departed to
the heavenly kingdom. He passed his life in great perfection
of humility, gentleness, continence, simplicity,
and justice. Thus he was a great benefactor, both to
his own people, and to those nations of the Scots and
Picts among whom he lived in exile, by the example of
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
his life, his earnestness in teaching, his authority in reproving,
and his piety in giving away of those things
which he received from the rich. He also added this to
the vows which we have mentioned: during Lent, he
would eat but one meal a day, allowing himself nothing
but bread and thin milk, and even that by measure.
The milk, new the day before, he kept in a vessel, and
skimming off the cream in the morning, drank the rest,
as has been said, with a little bread. Which sort of
abstinence he likewise always observed forty days before
the Nativity of our Lord, and as many after the solemnity
of Pentecost, that is, of the fifty days' festival.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_XXVIII'/>
<head>Chap. XXVIII. How, when Tuda was dead, Wilfrid
was ordained, in Gaul, and Ceadda, among the West
Saxons, to be bishops for the province of the Northumbrians.
[664 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the meantime, King Alchfrid sent the priest, Wilfrid,
to the king of Gaul,<note place='foot'>In 664. This was the young <q>Fainéant</q> king of Neustria,
Clothaire III. Wilfrid was probably sent abroad at his own request.
Doubtless he desired to have the canonical number of three
bishops at his consecration, and Boniface of Dunwich (c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XX'>20</ref>;
<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_V'>IV, 5</ref>) was the only prelate in England whose orders he would
have regarded as entirely satisfactory, for Wini might be considered
a usurper, and Cedd and Jaruman had been consecrated
by schismatics. Archbishop Deusdedit was dead (<ref target='Book_III_Chap_XX'>III, 20</ref>, note)
and so probably was Damian of Rochester.</note> in order that he should cause him
to be consecrated bishop for himself and his people.
That prince sent him to be ordained by Agilbert,<note place='foot'>He was Wilfrid's friend: <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. 25, pp. <ref target='Pg194'>194-5</ref>.</note> of
whom we have before spoken, and who, having left
Britain, was made bishop of the city of Paris;<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>, note.</note> and by
him Wilfrid was honourably consecrated, several bishops
meeting together for that purpose in a village belonging
to the king, called In Compendio.<note place='foot'>Compiègne, a royal <q>villa.</q> For the preposition, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XIV'>II, 14</ref>,
note. The ceremony was a specially magnificent one, Wilfrid
being carried in a golden chair by twelve bishops in choral procession,
according to an ancient custom of the Gallican Church.</note> He stayed some
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
time in the parts beyond the sea for his ordination, and
King Oswy, following the example of his son's zeal,
sent into Kent a holy man, of modest character, well
read in the Scripture, and diligently practising those
things which he had learned therein, to be ordained
bishop of the church of York. This was a priest called
Ceadda,<note place='foot'><ref target='Preface'>Preface</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIII'>III, 23</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>et saep.</hi> Why Oswy, who had consented
to Wilfrid's consecration (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>V, 19</ref>) acted in this manner is not
clear. Probably it implies that the Celtic party, during Wilfrid's
prolonged absence, had to some extent recovered their ascendency;
and, if it was at this time that Alchfrid (who is not heard of again)
rebelled against his father (<hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIV'>14</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi>) and was deprived
of his kingdom, Wilfrid would have lost his warmest supporter.</note> brother to the most reverend prelate Cedd, of
whom mention has been often made, and abbot of the
monastery of Laestingaeu. With him the king also sent
his priest Eadhaed,<note place='foot'>He retired to Ripon from Lindsey, of which he was the first
separate bishop, when Ethelred recovered that province for
Mercia in 679. But cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>IV, 12</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>, note, for the statement that
he was <q>Bishop</q> of Ripon.</note> who was afterwards, in the reign
of Egfrid,<note place='foot'>King of Northumbria, <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. 24, p. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>, note 3.</note> made bishop of the church of Ripon. Now
when they arrived in Kent, they found that Archbishop
Deusdedit had departed this life, and no other bishop was
as yet appointed in his place; whereupon they betook
themselves to the province of the West Saxons, where
Wini was bishop, and by him Ceadda was consecrated;
two bishops of the British nation, who kept Easter
Sunday, as has been often said, contrary to the canonical
manner, from the fourteenth to the twentieth moon,
being called in to assist at the ordination; for at that
time there was no other bishop in all Britain canonically
ordained, except Wini.<note place='foot'>It does not appear why Boniface (Bertgils) of Dunwich, Bishop
of the East Angles, 652-669 (c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XX'>20</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_V'>IV, 5</ref>), is ignored. Ceadda's
consecration was afterwards regarded as of doubtful validity and
was completed by Theodore (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>IV, 12</ref>). The British (probably
Cornish) bishops were schismatical, and Wini's position was irregular.
Moreover, the see to which Ceadda was consecrated was
not vacant.</note>
</p>

<p>
So Ceadda, being consecrated bishop, began immediately
to labour for ecclesiastical truth and purity of
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
doctrine; to apply himself to humility, self-denial, and
study; to travel about, not on horseback, but after the
manner of the Apostles, on foot, to preach the Gospel in
towns, the open country, cottages, villages, and castles;
for he was one of the disciples of Aidan, and endeavoured
to instruct his people by the same manner of life and
character, after his and his own brother Cedd's example.
Wilfrid also having been now made a bishop, came into
Britain, and in like manner by his teaching brought into
the English Church many rules of Catholic observance.
Whence it followed, that the Catholic principles daily
gained strength, and all the Scots that dwelt in England
either conformed to these, or returned into their own
country.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_XXIX'/>
<head>Chap. XXIX. How the priest Wighard was sent from
Britain to Rome, to be ordained archbishop; of his death
there, and of the letters of the Apostolic Pope giving an
account thereof. [667 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
At this time the most noble kings of the English, Oswy,
of the province of the Northumbrians, and Egbert of
Kent, consulted together to determine what ought to be
done about the state of the English Church, for Oswy,
though educated by the Scots, had rightly perceived
that the Roman was the Catholic and Apostolic Church.
They selected, with the consent and by the choice of the
holy Church of the English nation, a priest named Wighard,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_IV_Chap_I'>IV, 1</ref>.</note>
one of Bishop Deusdedit's clergy, a good man
and fitted for the episcopate, and sent him to Rome to
be ordained bishop, to the end that, having been raised
to the rank of an archbishop, he might ordain Catholic
prelates for the Churches of the English nation throughout
all Britain. But Wighard, arriving at Rome, was
cut off by death, before he could be consecrated bishop,
and the following letter was sent back into Britain to
King Oswy:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>To the most excellent lord, our son, Oswy, king of the
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
Saxons, Vitalian,<note place='foot'>Consecrated in 657&mdash;died in 672.</note> bishop, servant of the servants of God.</hi>
We have received to our comfort your Excellency's letters;
by reading whereof we are acquainted with your most
pious devotion and fervent love of the blessed life; and
know that by the protecting hand of God you have been
converted to the true and Apostolic faith, in hope that even
as you reign in your own nation, so you may hereafter
reign with Christ. Blessed be the nation, therefore, that
has been found worthy to have as its king one so wise
and a worshipper of God; forasmuch as he is not himself
alone a worshipper of God, but also studies day and
night the conversion of all his subjects to the Catholic
and Apostolic faith, to the redemption of his own soul.
Who would not rejoice at hearing such glad tidings?
Who would not exult and be joyful at these good works?
For your nation has believed in Christ the Almighty
God, according to the words of the Divine prophets, as
it is written in Isaiah, <q>In that day there shall be a root
of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people;
to it shall the Gentiles seek.</q><note place='foot'>Isaiah, xi, 10.</note> And again, <q>Listen, O
isles, unto me, and hearken ye people from far.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, xlix, 1.</note> And a
little after, <q>It is a light thing that thou shouldst be my
servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the
outcast of Israel. I have given thee for a light to the
Gentiles, that thou mayst be my salvation unto the end
of the earth.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 6.</note> And again, <q>Kings shall see, princes
also shall arise and worship.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 7.</note> And immediately after,
<q>I have given thee for a covenant of the people, to
establish the earth, and possess the scattered heritages;
that thou mayest say to the prisoners, Go forth; to
them that are in darkness, Show yourselves.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 8-9.</note> And
again, <q>I the Lord have called thee in righteousness,
and have held thine hand, and have kept thee, and have
given thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of
the Gentiles; to open the blind eyes, to bring out the
prisoner from the prison, and them that sit in darkness
from the prison-house.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, xlii, 6-7. The readings are from the Vulgate.</note></q>
</p>

<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>

<p>
<q>Behold, most excellent son, how it is plain as day
that it was prophesied not only of you, but also of all the
nations, that they should believe in Christ, the Creator
of all things. Wherefore it behoves your Highness, as
being a member of Christ, in all things continually to
follow the pious rule of the chief of the Apostles, in
celebrating Easter, and in all things delivered by the
holy Apostles, Peter and Paul, whose doctrine daily enlightens
the hearts of believers, even as the two lights
of heaven illumine the world.</q>
</p>

<p>
And after some lines, wherein he speaks of celebrating
the true Easter uniformly throughout all the world,&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>Finally,</q> he adds, <q rend='pre'>we have not been able now, on
account of the length of the journey, to find a man, apt
to teach, and qualified in all respects to be a bishop,
according to the tenor of your letters.<note place='foot'>It has not been stated that Oswy and Egbert asked the Pope
to provide an archbishop, failing Wighard. But this seems to be
implied in <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_I'>IV, 1</ref>: <q>episcopum, quem petierant.</q> Or, as is generally
supposed, Vitalian may have arbitrarily assumed this to be
the intention of their letter.</note> But, assuredly,
as soon as such a fit person shall be found, we will send
him well instructed to your country, that he may, by
word of mouth, and through the Divine oracles, with
the blessing of God, root out all the enemy's tares
throughout your island. We have received the presents
sent by your Highness to the blessed chief of the
Apostles, for an eternal memorial of him, and return you
thanks, and always pray for your safety with the clergy
of Christ. But he that brought these presents has been
removed out of this world, and is buried at the threshold
of the Apostles, for whom we have been much grieved,
because he died here. Nevertheless, we have caused the
blessed gifts of the saints, that is, the relics of the
blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul, and of the holy
martyrs, Laurentius, John, and Paul, and Gregory, and
Pancratius,<note place='foot'>There were several martyrs of the name of Laurentius, but
the best known is the Roman deacon, St. Laurence, who suffered
at Rome in 258 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> He was buried in the Via Tiburtina, where a
church dedicated to him is said to have been founded by Constantine
the Great. On the site stands the present Church of
S. Lorenzo fuori le Mura, the older part of which dates from the
sixth century at least. One of Aldhelm's foundations (<ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>V, 18</ref>) was
a little church dedicated to St. Laurence at Bradford-on-Avon in
705, probably the small Saxon church which still stands there.
There were many martyrs named John and Paul, and more than
one Gregory. St. Pancras was a boy-martyr, a Phrygian by birth,
who suffered at Rome in 304 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, when he was only fourteen
years of age. His martyrdom was widely celebrated, and miraculous
powers were attributed to his tomb outside the walls of
Rome. An old British church at Canterbury, which had been
desecrated by the heathen invaders, was restored for Christian
use and dedicated to St. Pancras by Augustine.</note> to be given to your servants, the bearers of
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
these our letters, to be by them delivered to your Excellency.
And to your consort<note place='foot'>Eanfled, <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XV'>15</ref> and note.</note> also, our spiritual
daughter, we have by the aforesaid bearers sent a cross,
with a gold key to it, made out of the most holy chains
of the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul; for, hearing of
her pious zeal, all the Apostolic see rejoices with us,
even as her pious works smell sweet and blossom before
God.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>We therefore desire that your Highness should
hasten, according to our wish, to dedicate all your
island to Christ our God; for assuredly you have for
your Protector, the Redeemer of mankind, our Lord
Jesus Christ, Who will prosper you in all things, that
you may gather together a new people of Christ, establishing
there the Catholic and Apostolic faith. For it is
written, <q>Seek ye first the kingdom of God and His
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto
you.</q><note place='foot'>St. Matt., vi, 33.</note> Truly your Highness seeks, and shall obtain, and
all your islands shall be made subject to you, even as we
desire. Saluting your Excellency with fatherly affection,
we never cease to pray to the Divine Goodness, to
vouchsafe to assist you and yours in all good works,
that you may reign with Christ in the world to come.
May the Heavenly Grace preserve your Excellency in
safety!</q>
</p>

<p>
In the next book we shall have a more suitable occasion
to show who was selected and consecrated in Wighard's
place.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_III_Chap_XXX'/>
<head>Chap. XXX. How the East Saxons, during a pestilence,
returned to idolatry, but were soon brought back from
their error by the zeal of Bishop Jaruman. [665 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
At the same time, the Kings Sighere and Sebbi,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_VI'>IV, 6</ref>. Sighere was the son, Sebbi the brother, of Sigbert
the Little (<hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXII'>22</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi>).</note> though
themselves subject to Wulfhere, king of the Mercians,
governed the province of the East Saxons after Suidhelm,
of whom we have spoken above.<note place='foot'>C. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXII'>22</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi></note> When that
province was suffering from the aforesaid disastrous
plague, Sighere, with his part of the people, forsook the
mysteries of the Christian faith, and turned apostate.
For the king himself, and many of the commons and
nobles, loving this life, and not seeking after another,
or even not believing in any other, began to restore the
temples that had been abandoned, and to adore idols, as
if they might by those means be protected against the
plague. But Sebbi, his companion and co-heir in the
kingdom, with all his people, very devoutly preserved
the faith which he had received, and, as we shall show
hereafter, ended his faithful life in great felicity.
</p>

<p>
King Wulfhere, hearing that the faith of the province
was in part profaned, sent Bishop Jaruman,<note place='foot'>C. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>; <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_III'>IV, 3</ref>.</note> who was
successor to Trumhere, to correct their error, and recall
the province to the true faith. He acted with much discretion,
as I was informed by a priest who bore him
company in that journey, and had been his fellow labourer
in the Word, for he was a religious and good man, and
travelling through all the country, far and near, brought
back both the people and the aforesaid king to the way
of righteousness, so that, either forsaking or destroying
the temples and altars which they had erected, they
opened the churches, and gladly confessed the Name of
Christ, which they had opposed, choosing rather to die
in the faith of resurrection in Him, than to live in the
abominations of unbelief among their idols. Having
thus accomplished their works, the priests and teachers
returned home with joy.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Book IV</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_I'/>
<head>Chap. I. How when Deusdedit died, Wighard was sent
to Rome to receive the episcopate; but he dying there,
Theodore was ordained archbishop, and sent into Britain
with the Abbot Hadrian. [664-669 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the above-mentioned year of the aforesaid eclipse<note place='foot'>664 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>: cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVII'>III, 27</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi></note>
and of the pestilence which followed it immediately, in
which also Bishop Colman, being overcome by the
united effort of the Catholics, returned home,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVI'>III, 26</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi></note> Deusdedit,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XX'>III, 20</ref> and note.</note>
the sixth bishop of the church of Canterbury,
died on the 14th of July. Earconbert,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VIII'>III, 8</ref>; V, 19, p. <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>.</note> also, king of Kent,
departed this life the same month and day; leaving his
kingdom to his son Egbert, who held it for nine years.
The see then became vacant for no small time, until, the
priest Wighard,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIX'>III, 29</ref>. From Bede's <q>History of the Abbots</q> we learn
that he was a pupil of Pope Gregory's Roman disciples in Kent.</note> a man of great learning in the teaching
of the Church, of the English race, was sent to Rome by
King Egbert and Oswy, king of the Northumbrians, as
was briefly mentioned in the foregoing book,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIX'>III, 29</ref>.</note> with a request
that he might be ordained Archbishop of the Church
of England; and at the same time presents were sent to
the Apostolic pope, and many vessels of gold and silver.
Arriving at Rome, where Vitalian<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, and note.</note> presided at that time
over the Apostolic see, and having made known to the
aforesaid Apostolic pope the occasion of his journey, he
was not long after carried off, with almost all his companions
who had come with him, by a pestilence which
fell upon them.
</p>

<p>
But the Apostolic pope having consulted about that
matter, made diligent inquiry for some one to send to be
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
archbishop of the English Churches. There was then in
the monastery of Niridanum, which is not far from
Naples in Campania, an abbot called Hadrian,<note place='foot'>Cf. Preface, p. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, note 3.</note> by nation
an African, well versed in Holy Scripture, trained in monastic
and ecclesiastical teaching, and excellently skilled
both in the Greek and Latin tongues. The pope, sending
for him, commanded him to accept the bishopric and go
to Britain. He answered, that he was unworthy of so
great a dignity, but said that he could name another,
whose learning and age were fitter for the episcopal
office. He proposed to the pope a certain monk named
Andrew, belonging to a neighbouring nunnery<note place='foot'>He was probably chaplain of the nunnery.</note> and he
was by all that knew him judged worthy of a bishopric;
but the weight of bodily infirmity prevented him from
becoming a bishop. Then again Hadrian was urged to
accept the episcopate; but he desired a respite, to see
whether in time he could find another to be ordained
bishop.
</p>

<p>
There was at that time in Rome, a monk, called
Theodore,<note place='foot'>Cf. Preface, p. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, note 2.</note> known to Hadrian, born at Tarsus in Cilicia,
a man instructed in secular and Divine writings, as also
in Greek and Latin; of high character and venerable
age, being sixty-six years old. Hadrian proposed him to
the pope to be ordained bishop, and prevailed; but upon
the condition that he should himself conduct him into
Britain, because he had already travelled through Gaul
twice upon different occasions, and was, therefore, better
acquainted with the way, and was, moreover, sufficiently
provided with men of his own; as also, to the end that,
being his fellow labourer in teaching, he might take special
care that Theodore should not, according to the custom of
the Greeks, introduce any thing contrary to the truth of
the faith into the Church where he presided.<note place='foot'>Cf. Bright, cc. 252, 253. He sees here an allusion to the
Monothelite controversy.</note> Theodore,
being ordained subdeacon, waited four months for his
hair to grow, that it might be shorn into the shape of a
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
crown; for he had before the tonsure of St. Paul,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, the Eastern, which consisted in shaving the whole head.
This method was supposed to have the authority of St. Paul (an
idea derived from Acts, xviii, 18), and of St. James <q>the Less.</q>
Cf. II, 2, p. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, note.</note> the
Apostle, after the manner of the eastern people. He was
ordained by Pope Vitalian, in the year of our Lord 668,
on Sunday, the 26th of March, and on the 27th of May
was sent with Hadrian to Britain.<note place='foot'>They were accompanied by Benedict Biscop (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVIII'>18</ref>) whom
Vitalian had asked to act as their guide and interpreter (<q>Hist.
Abb.,</q> § 3).</note>
</p>

<p>
They proceeded together by sea to Marseilles, and
thence by land to Arles, and having there delivered to
John, archbishop of that city,<note place='foot'>Archbishop of Arles, 658-675.</note> Pope Vitalian's letters of
recommendation, were by him detained till Ebroin,<note place='foot'>From this it has been inferred that Arles belonged to Neustria.
The king was Clothaire III, king of Neustria. Ebroin had succeeded
Ercinwald (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIX'>III, 19</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>) as Mayor of the Palace.
He was murdered in 681.</note> the
king's mayor of the palace, gave them leave to go where
they pleased. Having received the same, Theodore went
to Agilbert, bishop of Paris,<note place='foot'>III, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>7</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXV'>25</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVI'>26</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVIII'>28</ref>.</note> of whom we have spoken
above, and was by him kindly received, and long entertained.
But Hadrian went first to Emme, Bishop of
the Senones,<note place='foot'>Called also Emmo, or Haymo; Bishop of Sens, 658-675.</note> and then to Faro,<note place='foot'>Or Burgundofarus, Bishop of Meaux, 626-672. He was brother
of Fara, mentioned <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VIII'>III, 8</ref>.</note> bishop of the Meldi,
and lived in comfort with them a considerable time; for
the approach of winter had obliged them to rest wherever
they could. King Egbert, being informed by sure
messengers that the bishop they had asked of the Roman
prelate was in the kingdom of the Franks, sent thither
his reeve,<note place='foot'><q>Praefectus.</q></note> Raedfrid, to conduct him. He, having arrived
there, with Ebroin's leave took Theodore and conveyed
him to the port called Quentavic;<note place='foot'>Etaples in Picardy; <q>Quentae (or <q>ad Quantiam</q>) vicus</q> =
the village at the mouth of the Canche. It was an important commercial
town and port.</note> where, falling sick,
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
he stayed some time, and as soon as he began to recover,
sailed over into Britain. But Ebroin detained
Hadrian, suspecting that he went on some mission from
the Emperor to the kings of Britain, to the prejudice of
the kingdom of which he at that time had the chief
charge; however, when he found that in truth he had
never had any such commission, he discharged him, and
permitted him to follow Theodore. As soon as he came
to him, Theodore gave him the monastery of the blessed
Peter the Apostle,<note place='foot'>SS. Peter and Paul (St. Augustine's): cf. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXXIII'>I, 33</ref>. Theodore had
placed Benedict Biscop over it while Hadrian was still abroad.</note> where the archbishops of Canterbury
are wont to be buried, as I have said before; for at his
departure, the Apostolic lord had enjoined upon Theodore
that he should provide for him in his province, and give
him a suitable place to live in with his followers.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_II'/>
<head>Chap. II. How Theodore visited all places; how the
Churches of the English began to be instructed in the
study of Holy Scripture, and in the Catholic truth; and
how Putta was made bishop of the Church of Rochester
in the room of Damianus. [669 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Theodore came to his Church in the second year after
his consecration, on Sunday, the 27th of May, and spent
in it twenty-one years, three months, and twenty-six
days. Soon after, he visited all the island, wherever the
tribes of the English dwelt, for he was gladly received
and heard by all persons; and everywhere attended and
assisted by Hadrian, he taught the right rule of life, and
the canonical custom of celebrating Easter. This was
the first archbishop whom all the English Church consented
to obey. And forasmuch as both of them were, as
has been said before, fully instructed both in sacred and
in secular letters, they gathered a crowd of disciples,
and rivers of wholesome knowledge daily flowed from
them to water the hearts of their hearers; and, together
with the books of Holy Scripture, they also taught them
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
the metrical art, astronomy, and ecclesiastical arithmetic.
A testimony whereof is, that there are still living at this
day some of their scholars, who are as well versed in the
Greek and Latin tongues as in their own, in which they
were born. Nor were there ever happier times since the
English came into Britain; for having brave Christian
kings, they were a terror to all barbarous nations, and
the minds of all men were bent upon the joys of the
heavenly kingdom of which they had but lately heard;
and all who desired to be instructed in sacred studies
had masters at hand to teach them.
</p>

<p>
From that time also they began in all the churches of
the English to learn Church music, which till then had
been only known in Kent. And, excepting James, of
whom we have spoken above,<note place='foot'>II, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XVI'>16</ref>, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XX'>20</ref>.</note> the first teacher of singing
in the churches of the Northumbrians was Eddi,
surnamed Stephen,<note place='foot'>Eddius, the biographer of Wilfrid. He mentions himself (<q>Life
of Wilfrid,</q> Chapter XIV) as a <q>cantor.</q></note> invited from Kent by the most
reverend Wilfrid, who was the first of the bishops of the
English nation that learned to deliver to the churches of
the English the Catholic manner of life.<note place='foot'>Bede can scarcely mean to impeach the orthodoxy of the
bishops of native birth prior to Wilfrid. Probably the reference is
mainly to the prominent part he took in bringing about the decision
at Whitby.</note>
</p>

<p>
Theodore, journeying through all parts, ordained
bishops in fitting places, and with their assistance corrected
such things as he found faulty. Among the rest,
when he charged Bishop Ceadda with not having been
duly consecrated,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVIII'>III, 28</ref>, note.</note> he, with great humility, answered,
<q>If you know that I have not duly received episcopal
ordination, I willingly resign the office, for I never
thought myself worthy of it; but, though unworthy, for
obedience sake I submitted, when bidden to undertake
it.</q> Theodore, hearing his humble answer, said that he
should not resign the bishopric, and he himself completed
his ordination after the Catholic manner. Now at
the time when Deusdedit died, and a bishop for the
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
church of Canterbury was by request ordained and sent,
Wilfrid was also sent from Britain into Gaul to be
ordained; and because he returned before Theodore, he
ordained priests and deacons in Kent till the archbishop
should come to his see. But when Theodore came to
the city of Rochester, where the bishopric had been long
vacant by the death of Damian,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XX'>III, 20</ref>, and note.</note> he ordained a man
named Putta,<note place='foot'>Cc. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_V'>5</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>12</ref>. Florence of Worcester mentions a Putta, Bishop
of Hereford, who died in 688, but it is very doubtful whether he
can be identified with the above. Bede's words in Chapter <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>12</ref> do
not imply that Putta, Bishop of Rochester, became Bishop of Hereford.
Hereford was not one of the five sees into which Florence
tells us that Theodore divided the great Mercian bishopric, but it
appears soon after as a separate see for Hecana (Herefordshire).
Possibly Putta, who is traditionally reckoned as its first bishop,
may have acted as Sexwulf's deputy there.</note> trained rather in the teaching of the
Church and more addicted to simplicity of life than
active in worldly affairs, but specially skilful in Church
music, after the Roman use, which he had learned from
the disciples of the blessed Pope Gregory.<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XX'>II, 20</ref> <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>, note.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_III'/>
<head>Chap. III. How the above-mentioned Ceadda was made
Bishop of the province of Mercians. Of his life, death,
and burial. [669 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
At that time, the province of the Mercians was governed
by King Wulfhere, who, on the death of Jaruman,<note place='foot'>III, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXX'>30</ref>. He had probably died two years before Chad's
appointment, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, in 667, and the see had been vacant in the
interval, for Wilfrid, then in retirement at Ripon, is said (by Eddius)
to have discharged episcopal functions for the Mercians.</note>
desired of Theodore that a bishop should be given to
him and his people; but Theodore would not ordain a
new one for them, but requested of King Oswy that
Ceadda might be their bishop. He then lived in retirement
at his monastery, which is at Laestingaeu,<note place='foot'>Lastingham. Cf. Preface, p. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>; III, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVIII'>28</ref>.</note> while
Wilfrid administered the bishopric of York, and of all
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
the Northumbrians, and likewise of the Picts, as far as
King Oswy was able to extend his dominions. And,
seeing that it was the custom of that most reverend
prelate to go about the work of the Gospel everywhere
on foot rather than on horseback, Theodore commanded
him to ride whenever he had a long journey to undertake;
and finding him very unwilling, in his zeal and
love for his pious labour, he himself, with his own
hands, lifted him on horseback; for he knew him to be
a holy man, and therefore obliged him to ride wherever
he had need to go. Ceadda having received the bishopric
of the Mercians and of Lindsey,<note place='foot'>Lindsey at this time belonged to Mercia. Cf. c. 12, p. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>,
note 5.</note> took care to administer
it with great perfection of life, according to the example
of the ancient fathers. King Wulfhere also gave him
land of the extent of fifty families, to build a monastery,
at the place called Ad Barvae,<note place='foot'>Smith believed this place to be Barton-on-Humber. It is now
generally identified with Barrow in Lincolnshire. For the preposition,
cf. II, 14, p. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, note 5.</note> or <q>At the Wood,</q> in
the province of Lindsey, wherein traces of the monastic
life instituted by him continue to this day.
</p>

<p>
He had his episcopal see in the place called Lyccidfelth,<note place='foot'>It had not previously been an episcopal see, though Wulfhere
had wished to establish Wilfrid there during the vacancy in the
Mercian bishopric (p. <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, note 4). When the bishopric of Mercia
and Lindsey was subdivided by Theodore in 679, Lichfield remained
the see of the bishopric of Mercia proper. In 787, under Offa,
King of Mercia, with the consent of Pope Hadrian, it was raised
into a separate archbishopric for Mercia and East Anglia, but in
802 Canterbury was re-established as the sole archbishopric for
the Southern Province. The popular derivation of the name, Lichfield
(<q>Field of the Dead</q>) is from <foreign rend='italic'>lic</foreign> = a corpse, and the place is
traditionally connected with the martyrdom of a great number of
British Christians. Another derivation, however (from <foreign rend='italic'>leccian</foreign> = to
irrigate), points to the meaning <q>the watered field.</q></note>
in which he also died, and was buried, and where
the see of the succeeding bishops of that province continues
to this day. He had built himself a retired habitation
not far from the church, wherein he was wont to
pray and read in private, with a few, it might be seven
or eight of the brethren, as often as he had any spare
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
time from the labour and ministry of the Word. When
he had most gloriously governed the church in that
province for two years and a half, the Divine Providence
so ordaining, there came round a season like that of
which Ecclesiastes says, <q>That there is a time to cast
away stones, and a time to gather stones together;</q><note place='foot'>Eccl., iii. 5.</note>
for a plague fell upon them, sent from Heaven, which,
by means of the death of the flesh, translated the living
stones of the Church from their earthly places to the
heavenly building. And when, after many of the Church
of that most reverend prelate had been taken away out
of the flesh, his hour also drew near wherein he was to
pass out of this world to the Lord, it happened one day
that he was in the aforesaid habitation with only one
brother, called Owini,<note place='foot'>A stone which is believed to have formed part of Owini's
tomb was found at the end of the eighteenth century at Haddenham,
near Ely, and is now in Ely Cathedral. It bears the inscription,
<q>Lucem tuam Ovino da Deus et requiem. Amen</q> (Mayor
and Lumley).</note> his other companions having
upon some due occasion returned to the church. Now
Owini was a monk of great merit, having forsaken the
world with the sole desire of the heavenly reward;
worthy in all respects to have the secrets of the Lord
revealed to him in special wise, and worthy to have
credit given by his hearers to what he said. For he had
come with Queen Ethelthryth<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIX'>19</ref>.</note> from the province of the
East Angles, and was the chief of her thegns, and
governor of her house. As the fervour of his faith increased,
resolving to renounce the secular life, he did
not go about it slothfully, but so entirely forsook the
things of this world, that, quitting all that he had, clad
in a plain garment, and carrying an axe and hatchet in
his hand, he came to the monastery of the same most
reverend father, which is called Laestingaeu. He said
that he was not entering the monastery in order to live
in idleness, as some do, but to labour; which he also confirmed
by practice; for as he was less capable of studying
the Scriptures, the more earnestly he applied himself to
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
the labour of his hands. So then, forasmuch as he was
reverent and devout, he was kept by the bishop in the
aforesaid habitation with the brethren, and whilst they
were engaged within in reading, he was without, doing
such things as were necessary.
</p>

<p>
One day, when he was thus employed abroad, his
companions having gone to the church, as I began to
tell, and the bishop was alone reading or praying in
the oratory of that place, on a sudden, as he afterwards
said, he heard a sweet sound of singing and rejoicing
descend from heaven to earth. This sound he said he
first heard coming from the sky in the south-east, above
the winter sunrise, and that afterwards it drew near him
gradually, till it came to the roof of the oratory where
the bishop was, and entering therein, filled all the place
and encompassed it about. He listened attentively to
what he heard, and after about half an hour, perceived
the same song of joy to ascend from the roof of the said
oratory, and to return to heaven in the same way as it
came, with unspeakable sweetness. When he had stood
some time amazed, and earnestly considering in his
mind what this might be, the bishop opened the window
of the oratory, and making a sound with his hand, as he
was often wont to do, bade anyone who might be without
to come in to him. He went hastily in, and the
bishop said to him, <q>Make haste to the church, and
cause those seven brothers to come hither, and do you
come with them.</q> When they were come, he first admonished
them to preserve the virtue of love and peace
among themselves, and towards all the faithful; and with
unwearied earnestness to follow the rules of monastic
discipline, which they had either been taught by him,
and had seen him observe, or had found in the words
and actions of the former fathers. Then he added that
the day of his death was at hand; for, said he, <q>that
gracious guest, who was wont to visit our brethren,
has vouchsafed also to come to me this day, and to call
me out of this world. Return, therefore, to the church,
and speak to the brethren, that in their prayers they
commend my departure to the Lord, and that they be
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
mindful to prepare for their own, the hour whereof is
uncertain, by watching, and prayer, and good works.</q>
</p>

<p>
When he had spoken thus much and more to the same
end, and they, having received his blessing, had gone
away in great sorrow, he who had heard the heavenly
song returned alone, and prostrating himself on the
ground, said, <q>I beseech you, father, may I be permitted
to ask a question?</q>&mdash;<q>Ask what you will,</q>
answered the bishop. Then he said, <q>I beseech you to
tell me what was that song which I heard as of a joyful
company coming from heaven upon this oratory, and
after some time returning to heaven?</q> The bishop
answered: <q>If you heard the singing, and know of the
coming of the heavenly company, I command you, in
the Name of the Lord, that you tell it not to any before
my death. But in truth they were angelic spirits, who
came to call me to my heavenly reward, which I have
always loved and longed after, and they promised that
they would return seven days hence, and take me away
with them.</q> Which was indeed fulfilled, as had been
said to him; for being presently seized with bodily infirmity,
and the same daily increasing, on the seventh
day, as had been promised to him, when he had prepared
for death by receiving the Body and Blood of our
Lord, his saintly soul being delivered from the prison of
the body, led, as may justly be believed, by the attendant
angels, he departed to the joys of Heaven.
</p>

<p>
It is no wonder that he joyfully beheld the day of his
death, or rather the day of the Lord, the coming whereof
he had always been mindful to await with earnest expectation.
For with all his merits of continence, humility,
teaching, prayer, voluntary poverty, and other virtues,
he was so filled with the fear of the Lord, so mindful of
his latter end in all his actions, that, as I was wont to
hear from one of the brothers who instructed me in the
Scriptures, and who had been bred in his monastery,
and under his direction, whose name was Trumbert, if
it happened that there blew a sudden strong gust of
wind, when he was reading or doing any other thing, he
forthwith called upon the Lord for mercy, and begged
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
that it might be granted to all mankind. If the wind
grew stronger, he closed his book, and fell on his face,
praying still more earnestly. But, if a violent storm of
wind or rain came on, or if the earth and air were filled
with the terror of thunder and lightning, he would go to
the church, and anxiously devote himself with all his
heart to prayers and psalms till the weather became
calm. Being asked by his brethren why he did so, he
answered, <q>Have not you read&mdash;<q>The Lord also thundered
in the heavens, and the Highest gave his voice.
Yea, he sent out his arrows and scattered them; and he
shot out lightnings, and discomfited them.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. xviii, 13, 14.</note> For the
Lord moves the air, raises the winds, hurls lightning,
and thunders from heaven, to rouse the inhabitants of
the earth to fear him; to put them in mind of judgement
to come; to dispel their pride, and confound their boldness,
by recalling to their thoughts that dread time,
when the heavens and the earth being on fire, He will
come in the clouds, with great power and majesty, to
judge the quick and the dead. Wherefore,</q> said he, <q>it
behoves us to respond to His heavenly admonition with
due fear and love; that, as often as the air is moved and
He puts forth His hand threatening to strike, but does
not yet let it fall, we may immediately implore His mercy;
and searching the recesses of our hearts, and casting out
the dregs of our sins, we may carefully so act that we
may never deserve to be struck down.</q>
</p>

<p>
With this revelation and narrative of the aforesaid
brother, concerning the death of this prelate, agrees the
account of the most reverend Father Egbert, above
spoken of,<note place='foot'>III, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_IV'>4</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVII'>27</ref>.</note> who long and zealously led a monastic life
with the same Ceadda, when both were youths, in Ireland,
in prayer and self-denial and meditation on the
Holy Scriptures. But whereas Ceadda afterwards returned
into his own country, Egbert continued to live
abroad for the Lord's sake till the end of his life. A long
time after, Hygbald, a man of great holiness and continence,
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
who was an abbot in the province of Lindsey,<note place='foot'>He is said to have been Abbot of Bardney.</note>
came from Britain to visit him, and whilst, as became
holy men, they were discoursing of the life of the former
fathers, and rejoicing to imitate the same, mention was
made of the most reverend prelate, Ceadda; whereupon
Egbert said, <q>I know a man in this island, still in the
flesh, who, when Ceadda passed away from this world,
saw the soul of his brother Cedd, with a company of
angels, descending from heaven, who, having taken
Ceadda's soul along with them, returned again to the
heavenly kingdom.</q> Whether he said this of himself,
or some other, we do not certainly know; but because
it was said by so great a man, there can be no doubt of
the truth thereof.
</p>

<p>
Ceadda died on the 2nd of March,<note place='foot'>In 672. The original Church of St. Mary at Lichfield, said to
have been built by Oswy in 656-657, was replaced about 1140 by
the new Cathedral, and Ceadda's relics were soon after removed
to it.</note> and was first buried
by St. Mary's Church, but afterwards, when the church
of the most blessed chief of the Apostles, Peter, was
built in the same place, his bones were translated into
it. In both which places, as a testimony of his virtue,
frequent miracles of healing are wont to be wrought.
And of late, a certain man that had a frenzy, wandering
about everywhere, arrived there in the evening, unperceived
or disregarded by the keepers of the place, and
having rested there the whole of the night, came forth
in his right mind the next morning, to the surprise and
joy of all, and told what a cure had been wrought on
him through the goodness of God. The place of the
sepulchre is a wooden monument, made like a little
house, covered, having a hole in the wall, through which
those that go thither for devotion are wont to put in
their hand and take out some of the dust. This they put
into water and give to sick cattle or men to drink,
whereupon they are presently eased of their infirmity,
and restored to their desired health.
</p>

<p>
In his place, Theodore ordained Wynfrid,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>III, 24</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>, note.</note> a man of
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
good and sober life, to preside, like his predecessors,
over the bishoprics of the Mercians, the Midland Angles,
and Lindsey, of all which, Wulfhere, who was still
living, was king. Wynfrid was one of the clergy of the
prelate he succeeded, and had for no small time filled
the office of deacon under him.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_IV'/>
<head>Chap. IV. How Bishop Colman, having left Britain,
built two monasteries in the country of the Scots; the
one for the Scots, the other for the English whom he had
taken along with him. [667 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the meantime, Colman, the Scottish bishop, departing
from Britain,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVI'>III, 26</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi></note> took along with him all the Scots
whom he had gathered about him in the isle of Lindisfarne,
and also about thirty of the English nation, for
both these companies had been trained in duties of the
monastic life; and leaving some brothers in his church,
he went first to the isle of Hii,<note place='foot'>Iona. Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_III'>III, 3</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>, note.</note> whence he had been sent
to preach the Word of God to the English nation. Afterwards
he retired to a small island, which is to the west
of Ireland, and at some distance from it, called in the
language of the Scots, Inisboufinde,<note place='foot'>Innisboffin, off the coast of Mayo. The annals of Ulster give
667 as the date of his retirement to it.</note> the Island of the
White Heifer. Arriving there, he built a monastery, and
placed in it the monks he had brought of both nations.
But they could not agree among themselves, by reason
that the Scots, in the summer season, when the harvest
was to be brought in, leaving the monastery, wandered
about through places known to them; but returned
again the next winter, and desired to use in common
what the English had provided. Colman sought to put
an end to this dissension, and travelling about far and
near, he found a place in the island of Ireland fitted to
be the site of a monastery, which, in the language of the
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
Scots, is called Mageo.<note place='foot'>Mayo, called from this settlement, <q>Mayo of the Saxons.</q> It
continued to be an English monastery (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi>), and after awhile
adopted those usages, to avoid which Colman had left England.
It became an episcopal see, which in 1559 was annexed to the
archbishopric of Tuam.</note> He bought a small part of it of
the chief to whom it belonged, to build his monastery
thereon; upon condition, that the monks dwelling there
should pray to the Lord for him who let them have the
place. Then at once building a monastery, with the
assistance of the chief and all the neighbouring people, he
placed the English there, leaving the Scots in the aforesaid
island. This monastery is to this day occupied by
English inhabitants; being the same that, grown from a
small beginning to be very large, is commonly called
Muigeo; and as all have long since been brought to
adopt better customs, it contains a notable society of
monks, who are gathered there from the province of the
English, and live by the labour of their own hands, after
the example of the venerable fathers, under a rule and
a canonical abbot, in much continence and singleness of
life.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_V'/>
<head>Chap. V. Of the death of the kings Oswy and Egbert,
and of the synod held at the place Herutford,<note place='foot'>Hertford.</note> in which
Archbishop Theodore presided. [670-673 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 670,<note place='foot'>It seems probable that we ought to read 671; cf. Plummer <hi rend='italic'>ad
loc.</hi></note> being the second year after
Theodore arrived in England, Oswy, king of the Northumbrians,
fell sick, and died, in the fifty-eighth year of
his age.<note place='foot'>Oswy is the last king in Bede's list of those who held an
<q>imperium</q> (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_II_Chap_V'>II, 5</ref>). With the rise of Mercia under Wulfhere
(<ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>III, 24</ref>), the supremacy of Northumbria had virtually passed away.
After Oswy's death, the position of Northumbria was an isolated
one, and it was by conquests over Britons, not Englishmen, that
Egfrid enlarged the bounds of his kingdom.</note> He at that time bore so great affection to the
Roman Apostolic usages, that he had designed, if he
recovered from his sickness, to go to Rome, and there
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
to end his days at the holy places, having asked Bishop
Wilfrid, with a promise of no small gift of money, to
conduct him on his journey. He died on the 15th of
February, leaving his son Egfrid<note place='foot'>In his youth he had been a hostage at the court of Queen
Cynwise, wife of Penda (III, 24, p. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>).</note> his successor in the
kingdom. In the third year of his reign, Theodore
assembled a council of bishops, along with many other
teachers of the church, who loved and were acquainted
with the canonical statutes of the fathers. When they
were met together, he began, in the spirit which became
a bishop, to enjoin the observance of such things as were
in accordance with the unity and the peace of the Church.
The purport of the proceedings of this synod is as
follows:&mdash;<note place='foot'>This is of supreme importance as the first English provincial
Council and the first national assembly of the English. The rule
laid down at Nicaea and confirmed by later councils was that
provincial synods should meet twice a year to settle all ecclesiastical
matters which affected the province as a unity.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In the name of our Lord God and Saviour Jesus
Christ, Who reigns for ever and governs His Church, it
was thought meet that we should assemble, according to
the custom prescribed in the venerable canons, to treat
about the necessary affairs of the Church. We met on
the 24th day of September, the first indiction,<note place='foot'>24th September, 673, falls in the first indiction, whether the
Pontifical or the <q>Caesarean</q> system is meant (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Haddan and
Stubbs, III, 121). Bede himself used the Caesarean indiction, of
which we get the first notice in his <q>De Temporum Ratione.</q> It
began on 24th September. It does not, however, follow that Theodore
also used it. The oldest scheme, viz., the Constantinopolitan,
began on 1st September; the Roman or Pontifical, on New Year's
Day as received at the time, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, 25th December, 1st January, or 21st
March. For Indictions, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <q>Dictionary of Christian Antiquities.</q>
They were cycles of fifteen years, a mode of reckoning dates which
appeared in the fourth century, based upon the Imperial fiscal
system, but which came to be used irrespective of taxation. <q>1st
indiction</q> stands for <q>1st year of the indiction.</q></note> at the
place which is called Herutford: I, Theodore, albeit unworthy,
appointed by the Apostolic see bishop of the
church of Canterbury; our fellow priest and brother, the
most reverend Bisi, bishop of the East Angles; and with
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
us also our brother and fellow priest, Wilfrid, bishop of
the nation of the Northumbrians, represented by his
proxies. There were present also our brothers and fellow
priests, Putta, bishop of the Kentish castle, called Rochester;
Leutherius, bishop of the West Saxons, and
Wynfrid, bishop of the province of the Mercians.<note place='foot'>Of the six suffragans only four were present. Wilfrid was at
this time (669-678) in possession of his see; why he did not appear
in person is not explained. Possibly his action foreshadows the
future troubles between him and Theodore. Wini, Bishop of
London, was still alive (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>III, 7</ref>, and note). If the story of his
retirement to Winchester is true, this would account for his
absence. For Bisi, <hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi>. His see was at Dunwich (cf. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XV'>II, 15</ref>).
For Putta, <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_II'>2</ref> and note; for Leutherius, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>III, 7</ref>; for Wynfrid,
<ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>III, 24</ref>; <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_III'>IV, 3</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi></note> When
we were all met together, and had sat down in order, I
said, <q>I beseech you, most dear brothers, for the fear
and love of our Redeemer, that we may all treat in
common on behalf of our faith; to the end that whatsoever
has been decreed and defined by holy and approved
fathers, may be inviolably observed by all of us.</q> This
and much more I spoke tending to charity and the preservation
of the unity of the Church; and when I had
ended my preface, I asked every one of them in order,
whether they consented to observe the things that had
been of old canonically decreed by the fathers? To which
all our fellow priests answered, <q>Most assuredly we are
all resolved to observe willingly and heartily whatsoever
is laid down in the canons of the holy fathers.</q> Then
forthwith I produced the said book of canons,<note place='foot'>The collection of Canons approved by the Council of Chalcedon,
translated into Latin by Dionysius Exiguus (early in the sixth
century, cf. V, 21, p. <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>, note) and adopted by the Western Church.</note> and in
the presence of them all showed ten articles in the same,
which I had marked in several places, because I knew
them to be of the most importance to us, and entreated
that these might be most particularly received by them all.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Article I. That we all in common keep the holy day
of Easter on the Sunday after the fourteenth moon of the
first month.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>II. That no bishop intrude into the diocese of
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
another, but be satisfied with the government of the
people committed to him.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>III. That it shall not be lawful for any bishop to disturb
in any matter monasteries dedicated to God, nor to
take away forcibly any part of their property.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>IV. That the monks themselves do not move from
one place to another, that is, from monastery to monastery,
unless with the consent of their own abbot; but
that they continue in the obedience which they promised
at the time of their conversion.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>V. That no clerk, forsaking his own bishop, shall
wander about, or be anywhere received without commendatory
letters from his diocesan. But if he shall be
once received, and will not return when summoned, both
the receiver, and he that is received shall be under excommunication.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>VI. That bishops and clergy, when travelling, shall
be content with the hospitality that is afforded them;
and that it be not lawful for any one of them to exercise
any priestly function without leave of the bishop in whose
diocese he is known to be.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>VII. That a synod be assembled twice a year; but
on account of divers hindrances, it was approved by all,
that we should meet once a year, on the 1st of August,
at the place called Clofeshoch.<note place='foot'>This place used to be identified with Cliff-at-Hoe near Rochester,
but the theory rests mainly on the similarity of name.
As in the recorded Councils of Clovesho the supremacy of Mercia
is clearly indicated, it is generally assumed that the place must
have been either in Mercia or a kingdom subject to it, as Kent
was at the time. Except one Council in 716, we find none mentioned
as having taken place at Clovesho till seventy years after
this time (747), but councils were held at other places.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>VIII. That no bishop, through ambition, shall set
himself above another; but that they shall all observe
the time and order of their consecration.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>IX. The ninth Article was discussed in common, to
the effect that more bishops should be made, as the
number of the faithful increased; but this matter for the
present was passed over.<note place='foot'>The subdivision of the great bishoprics was an important part
of Theodore's policy, and though at this Council he failed to carry
his point, possibly through the opposition of Wilfrid's representatives,
in the succeeding years he effected a great change in the
organization of the episcopate, creating dioceses co-extensive
with tribal territories.</note></q>
</p>

<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>X. Of marriages; that nothing be allowed but lawful
wedlock; that none commit incest; no man leave his
own wife, except it be, as the holy Gospel teaches, for
fornication. And if any man shall put away his own
wife, lawfully joined to him in matrimony, that he take
no other, if he wishes to be a true Christian, but continue
as he is, or else be reconciled to his own wife.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>These articles being thus discussed and defined in
common, to the end, that for the future, no stumbling-block
of contention might arise from any one of us, or
that things be falsely set forth, it was thought fit that
every one of us should, by the subscription of his own
hand, confirm all the particulars so defined. Which
judgement, as defined by us, I dictated to be written by
Titillus our notary. Given in the month and indiction
aforesaid. Whosoever, therefore, shall attempt in any
way to oppose or infringe this decision, confirmed by
our consent, and by the subscription of our hands,
according to the decree of the canons, must know, that
he is excluded from all sacerdotal functions, and from
our fellowship. May the Grace of God keep us in safety,
living in the unity of His Holy Church.</q>
</p>

<p>
This synod was held in the year of our Lord 673. In
which year Egbert, king of Kent,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIX'>III, 29</ref>; <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_I'>IV, 1</ref>.</note> died in the month of
July; his brother Hlothere<note place='foot'>Cc. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXII'>22</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVI'>26</ref>.</note> succeeded him on the throne,
which he held eleven years and seven months. Bisi, the
bishop of the East Angles, who is said to have been in
the aforesaid synod, a man of great saintliness and piety,
was successor to Boniface,<note place='foot'>His original name was Bertgils, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XX'>III, 20</ref>.</note> before spoken of; for when
Boniface died, after having been bishop seventeen years,
he was ordained by Theodore and made bishop in his
place. Whilst he was still alive, but hindered by grievous
infirmity from administering his episcopal functions, two
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
bishops, Aecci and Badwin, were elected and consecrated
in his place; from which time to the present, that
province has had two bishops.<note place='foot'>Theodore availed himself of this opportunity for subdivision.
Aecci was appointed to Dunwich and Badwin to the new see of
Elmham. Suffolk and Norfolk thus each received a separate
bishopric. The Danish invasions broke up this arrangement;
Dunwich disappeared as an episcopal see, and the succession to
Elmham was interrupted for a time. In 1075 the see of the single
East Anglian bishopric was removed to Thetford, and in 1094 to
Norwich.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_VI'/>
<head>Chap. VI. How Wynfrid being deposed, Sexwulf received
his bishopric, and Earconwald was made bishop
of the East Saxons. [675 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Not long after these events, Theodore, the archbishop,
taking offence at some act of disobedience of Wynfrid,
bishop of the Mercians,<note place='foot'>It has been conjectured that he resisted the subdivision of his
diocese. For his subsequent adventures, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> III, 24, p. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, note 4.</note> deposed him from his bishopric
when he had held it but a few years, and in his place
ordained Sexwulf bishop,<note place='foot'>This was probably in 675 (Flor. of Wor.). Sexwulf (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi>
c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>12</ref>) had been a rich thegn who became a monk and was made
first abbot of Medeshamstead.</note> who was founder and abbot of
the monastery which is called Medeshamstead,<note place='foot'>Peterborough, as the town which grew up around the monastery
came to be called in the tenth century, the monastery being
dedicated to St. Peter. Peada is said to have planned the foundation
(<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Peterborough additions to the Saxon Chronicle), but the
accounts are late and untrustworthy.</note> in the
country of the Gyrwas.<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_III_Chap_XX'>III, 20</ref>, note.</note> Wynfrid, thus deposed, returned
to his monastery which is called Ad Barvae,<note place='foot'>C. 3, p. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, note 2.</note> and
there ended his life in holy conversation.
</p>

<p>
Theodore then also appointed Earconwald,<note place='foot'>He succeeded Wini (<ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>III, 7</ref>) in 675 and died about 693. He was
canonized. It was in his house that the reconciliation between
Theodore and Wilfrid took place. It is said that as a boy he had
heard Mellitus preach in London. He was present at the West
Saxon Witenagemot which enacted the <q>Dooms of Ine</q> (c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XV'>15</ref>
and <ref target='Book_V_Chap_VII'>V, 7</ref>), and is spoken of as one of Ine's bishops, Essex being
probably subject to Wessex at that time.</note> bishop of
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
the East Saxons, in the city of London, over whom at
that time reigned Sebbi and Sighere, of whom mention
has been made above.<note place='foot'>In <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXX'>III, 30</ref>.</note> This Earconwald's life and conversation,
as well when he was bishop as before that
time, is said to have been most holy, as is even now
testified by heavenly miracles; for to this day, his horse-litter,
in which he was wont to be carried when sick, is
kept by his disciples, and continues to cure many of
fevers and other ailments; and not only sick persons
who are laid under that litter, or close by it, are cured;
but the very splinters cut from it, when carried to the
sick, are wont immediately to bring healing to them.
</p>

<p>
This man, before he was made bishop, had built two
famous monasteries, the one for himself, and the other
for his sister Ethelburg,<note place='foot'>Cc. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_VII'>7-10</ref>. She is not to be confused with Ethelberg, daughter
of Anna (<ref target='Book_III_Chap_VIII'>III, 8</ref>), Abbess of Faremoûtier-en-Brie.</note> and established them both in
regular discipline of the best kind. That for himself was
in the district of Sudergeona, by the river Thames, at a
place called Cerotaesei,<note place='foot'>Chertsey in Surrey. William of Malmesbury tells us that it was
a flourishing monastery till it was destroyed by the Danes.</note> that is, the Island of Cerot;
that for his sister in the province of the East Saxons, at
a place called In Berecingum,<note place='foot'>Barking in Essex, <hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi> cc. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_VII'>7-10</ref>. For the preposition,
<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> II, 14, p. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, note 5.</note> wherein she might be a
mother and nurse of women devoted to God. Being put
into the government of that monastery, she showed herself
in all respects worthy of her brother the bishop, by
her own holy life and by her regular and pious care of
those under her rule, as was also manifested by heavenly
miracles.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_VII'/>
<head>Chap. VII. How it was indicated by a light from heaven
where the bodies of the nuns should be buried in the
monastery of Berecingum. [675 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>?]</head>

<p>
In this monastery many miracles were wrought, accounts
of which have been committed to writing by those who
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
were acquainted with them, that their memory might be
preserved, and succeeding generations edified, and these
are in the possession of many persons; some of them we
also have taken pains to include in our History of the
Church. At the time of the pestilence, already often
mentioned,<note place='foot'>The plague of 664 has been mentioned in <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVII'>III, 27</ref>; IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_I'>1</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_III'>3</ref>; but
this may have been a later visitation. Barking is generally supposed
to have been founded in 666.</note> which ravaged all the country far and wide,
it had also seized on that part of this monastery where
the men abode, and they were daily hurried away to the
Lord. The careful mother of the community began often
to inquire of the sisters, when they were gathered together;
in what part of the monastery they desired to be
buried and a cemetery to be made, when the same affliction
should fall upon that part of the monastery in which
the handmaids of the Lord dwelt together apart from the
men, and they should be snatched away out of this world
by the same destruction as the rest. Receiving no certain
answer from the sisters, though she often questioned
them, she and all of them received a most certain answer
from the Divine Providence. For one night, after matins
had been sung, and those handmaids of Christ had gone
out of their chapel to the tombs of the brothers who had
departed this life before them, and were singing the
customary songs of praise to the Lord, on a sudden a
light from heaven, like a great sheet, came down upon
them all, and struck them with such amazement, that, in
consternation, they even left off singing their hymn.
But that resplendent light, in comparison wherewith the
sun at noon-day might seem dark, soon after, rising from
that place, removed to the south side of the monastery,
that is, to the westward of the chapel, and having continued
there some time, and rested upon those parts, in
the sight of them all withdrew itself again to heaven,
leaving no doubt in the minds of all, but that the same
light, which was to lead or to receive the souls of those
handmaids of Christ into Heaven, also showed the place
in which their bodies were to rest and await the day of
the resurrection. The radiance of this light was so great,
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
that one of the older brethren, who at the same time was
in their chapel with another younger than himself, related
in the morning, that the rays of light which came
in at the crannies of the doors and windows, seemed to
exceed the utmost brightness of daylight.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_VIII'/>
<head>Chap. VIII. How a little boy, dying in the same monastery,
called upon a virgin that was to follow him; and
how another nun, at the point of leaving her body, saw
some small part of the future glory. [675 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>?]</head>

<p>
There was, in the same monastery, a boy, not above
three years old, called Aesica; who, by reason of his
tender age, was being brought up among the virgins
dedicated to God, there to learn his lessons. This child
being seized by the aforesaid pestilence, when his last
hour was come, called three times upon one of the
virgins consecrated to Christ, speaking to her by her
own name, as if she had been present, Eadgyth! Eadgyth!
Eadgyth! and thus ending his temporal life,
entered into that which is eternal. The virgin, to whom
he called, as he was dying, was immediately seized,
where she was, with the same sickness, and departing
this life the same day on which she had been summoned,
followed him that called her into the heavenly kingdom.
</p>

<p>
Likewise, one of the same handmaids of God, being
smitten with the same disease, and reduced to the last
extremity, began on a sudden, about midnight, to cry
out to them that ministered to her, desiring they would
put out the lamp that was lighted there. And, when she
had done this many times, and yet no one did her will,
at last she said, <q>I know that you think I am raving,
when I say this, but be assured that it is not so; for I
tell you truly, that I see this house filled with so great a
light, that that lamp of yours seems to me to be altogether
dark.</q> And when still no one replied to what she said,
or did her bidding, she added, <q>Burn your lamp, then,
as long as you will; but know, that it is not my light,
for my light will come to me at the dawn of day.</q> Then
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
she began to tell, that a certain man of God, who had
died that same year, had appeared to her, telling her
that at the break of day she should depart to the eternal
light. The truth of which vision was speedily proved by
the maiden's death as soon as the day appeared.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. IX. Of the signs which were shown from Heaven
when the mother of that community departed this life.
[675 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>?]</head>

<p>
Now when Ethelburg herself, the pious mother of that
community devoted to God, was about to be taken out
of this world, a wonderful vision appeared to one of the
sisters, called Tortgyth; who, having lived many years
in that monastery, always endeavoured, in all humility
and sincerity, to serve God herself, and to help the mother
to maintain regular discipline, by instructing and reproving
the younger ones. Now, in order that her virtue
might, according to the Apostle, be made perfect in
weakness, she was suddenly seized with a most grievous
bodily disease, under which, through the merciful providence
of our Redeemer, she was sorely tried for the
space of nine years; to the end, that whatever stain of
evil remained amidst her virtues, either through ignorance
or neglect, might all be purified in the furnace of
long tribulation. This woman, going out of the chamber
where she abode one night, at dusk, plainly saw as it were
a human body, which was brighter than the sun, wrapped
in fine linen, and lifted up on high, being taken out of
the house in which the sisters used to sleep. Then
looking earnestly to see what it was that drew up that
appearance of the glorious body which she beheld, she
perceived that it was raised on high as it were by cords
brighter than gold, until, entering into the open heavens,
it could no longer be seen by her. Reflecting on this
vision, she made no doubt that some one of the community
would soon die, and her soul be lifted up to
heaven by the good works which she had wrought, as it
were by golden cords. And so in truth it befell; for a
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
few days after, the beloved of God, Ethelburg, mother of
that community, was delivered out of the prison of the
flesh; and her life is proved to have been such that no
one who knew her ought to doubt that an entrance into
the heavenly country was open to her, when she departed
from this life.
</p>

<p>
There was also, in the same monastery, a certain nun,
of noble origin in this world, and still nobler in the love
of the world to come; who had, for many years, been so
disabled in all her body, that she could not move a single
limb. When she heard that the body of the venerable
abbess had been carried into the church, till it should be
buried, she desired to be carried thither, and to be placed
bending towards it, after the manner of one praying;
which being done, she spoke to her as if she had been
living, and entreated her that she would obtain of the
mercy of our pitiful Creator, that she might be delivered
from such great and long-continued pains; nor was it
long before her prayer was heard: for being delivered
from the flesh twelve days after, she exchanged her
temporal afflictions for an eternal reward.
</p>

<p>
For three years after the death of her Superior, the
aforesaid handmaid of Christ, Tortgyth, was detained in
this life and was so far spent with the sickness before
mentioned, that her bones scarce held together. At
last, when the time of her release was at hand, she
not only lost the use of her other limbs, but also of her
tongue; in which state having continued three days
and as many nights, she was, on a sudden, restored by
a spiritual vision, and opened her lips and eyes, and
looking up to heaven, began thus to speak to the vision
which she saw: <q>Very acceptable to me is thy coming,
and thou art welcome!</q> Having so said, she was silent
awhile, as it were, waiting for the answer of him whom
she saw and to whom she spoke; then, as if somewhat
displeased, she said, <q>I can in no wise gladly suffer
this;</q> then pausing awhile, she said again, <q>If it can
by no means be to-day, I beg that the delay may not be
long;</q> and again holding her peace a short while, she
concluded thus; <q>If it is certainly so determined, and
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
the decree cannot be altered, I beg that it may be no
longer deferred than this next night.</q> Having so said,
and being asked by those about her with whom she
talked, she said, <q>With my most dear mother, Ethelburg;</q>
by which they understood, that she was come
to acquaint her that the time of her departure was at
hand; for, as she had desired, after one day and night,
she was delivered alike from the bonds of the flesh and
of her infirmity and entered into the joys of eternal
salvation.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_X'/>
<head>Chap. X. How a blind woman, praying in the burial-place
of that monastery, was restored to her sight. [675
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>?]</head>

<p>
Hildilid, a devout handmaid of God, succeeded Ethelburg
in the office of abbess and presided over that
monastery with great vigour many years, till she was of
an extreme old age,<note place='foot'>Two different dates are given for her succession, 664 and 675.
If the former is right, the plague (c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_VII'>7</ref>) must have been that of 664,
and Ethelburg probably died of it. It appears from a letter of St.
Boniface that Hildilid was alive in 709. She was one of Aldhelm's
numerous women-scholars. He dedicated the prose version of his
work in praise of virginity (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>V, 18</ref>) to her and others of the
sisterhood, and speaks highly of their scholarly attainments.</note> in the observance of regular discipline,
and carefully providing all things for the common
use. The narrowness of the space where the monastery
is built, led her to determine that the bones of the
servants and handmaidens of Christ, who had been
there buried, should be taken up, and should all be
translated into the church of the Blessed Mother of God,
and interred in one place. How often a brightness of
heavenly light was seen there, when this was done, and
a fragrancy of wonderful sweetness arose, and what
other signs were revealed, whosoever reads will find in
the book from which we have taken these tales.<note place='foot'>Apparently a life of St. Ethelburg not known to exist now.</note>
</p>

<p>
But in truth, I think it by no means fit to pass over
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
the miracle of healing, which the same book informs us
was wrought in the cemetery of that community dedicated
to God. There lived in that neighbourhood a certain
thegn, whose wife was seized with a sudden dimness
in her eyes, and as the malady increased daily, it became
so burdensome to her, that she could not see the least
glimpse of light. Having continued some time wrapped
in the night of this blindness, on a sudden she bethought
herself that she might recover her lost sight, if she were
carried to the monastery of the nuns, and there prayed
at the relics of the saints. Nor did she lose any time in
fulfilling that which she had conceived in her mind: for
being conducted by her maids to the monastery, which
was very near, and professing that she had perfect faith
that she should be there healed, she was led into the
cemetery, and having long prayed there on her knees,
she did not fail to be heard, for as she rose from prayer,
before she went out of the place, she received the gift of
sight which she had desired; and whereas she had been
led thither by the hands of her maids, she now returned
home joyfully without help: as if she had lost the light
of this world to no other end than that she might show
by her recovery how great a light is vouchsafed to the
saints of Christ in Heaven, and how great a grace of
healing power.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_XI'/>
<head>Chap. XI. How Sebbi, king of the same province, ended
his life in a monastery. [694 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
At that time, as the same little book informs us, Sebbi,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXX'>III, 30</ref>; <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_VI'>IV, 6</ref>.</note>
a very devout man, of whom mention has been made
above, governed the kingdom of the East Saxons. His
mind was set on religious acts, frequent prayer and pious
fruits of almsgiving; he esteemed a private and monastic
life better than all the wealth and honours of his kingdom,
and he would have long before left his kingdom
and adopted that life, had not his wife firmly refused to
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
be divorced from him; for which reason many were of
opinion and often said that a man of such a disposition
ought rather to have been made a bishop than a king.
When he had spent thirty years as a king and a soldier
of the heavenly kingdom, he fell into great bodily infirmity,
of which he afterwards died, and he admonished
his wife, that they should then at least together devote
themselves to the service of God, since they could no
longer together enjoy, or rather serve, the world.
Having with much difficulty obtained this of her, he
went to Waldhere, bishop of London, who had succeeded
Earconwald,<note place='foot'>For Earconwald, <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_VI'>6</ref>. Waldhere is the first of a long list
of undistinguished bishops of London given by William of Malmesbury.
A letter of his to Archbishop Bertwald survives, and there is
a charter in which Swefred (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> next note) grants lands at Twickenham
to him in 704.</note> and with his blessing received the
religious habit, which he had long desired. He also
carried to him a considerable sum of money, to be given
to the poor, reserving nothing to himself, but rather
coveting to remain poor in spirit for the sake of the
kingdom of Heaven.
</p>

<p>
When the aforesaid sickness increased, and he perceived
the day of his death to be drawing near, being a
man of a royal disposition, he began to apprehend lest,
when in great pain, at the approach of death, he might
commit anything unworthy of his character, either by
word or gesture. Wherefore, calling to him the aforesaid
bishop of London, in which city he then was, he entreated
him that none might be present at his death,
besides the bishop himself, and two of his own attendants.
The bishop having promised that he would most
willingly grant his request, not long after the man of
God composed himself to sleep, and saw a consoling
vision, which took from him all anxiety concerning the
aforesaid uneasiness; and, moreover, showed him on
what day he was to end his life. For, as he afterwards
related, he saw three men in shining garments come to
him; one of whom sat down by his bed, whilst his companions
who had come with him stood and inquired
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
about the state of the sick man they had come to visit,
and he said that the king's soul should quit his body
without any pain, and with a great splendour of light;
and told him that he should die the third day after.
Both these things came to pass, as he had learnt from
the vision; for on the third day after, at the ninth hour,
he suddenly fell, as it were, into a light slumber, and
without any sense of pain he gave up the ghost.
</p>

<p>
A stone coffin had been prepared for his burial, but
when they came to lay him in it, they found his body
a span longer than the coffin. Hereupon they chipped
away as much of the stone as they could, and made
the coffin about two inches longer; but not even so
would it contain the body. Wherefore because of this
difficulty of entombing him, they had thoughts either to
get another coffin, or else to shorten the body, by bending
it at the knees, if they could, so that the coffin might
contain it. But Heaven interposed and a miracle prevented
the execution of either of those designs; for on a
sudden, in the presence of the bishop and Sighard, who
was the son of that same king and monk, and who reigned
after him jointly with his brother Suefred,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_VIII'>V, 8</ref>, note on Suaebhard.</note> and of no small
number of men, that coffin was found to fit the length of
the body, insomuch that a pillow might even be put in
at the head; and at the feet the coffin was four inches
longer than the body. He was buried in the church of
the blessed teacher of the Gentiles,<note place='foot'>St. Paul's, London. Sebbi's tomb is believed to have survived
till the fire of 1666.</note> by whose doctrine
he had learned to hope for heavenly things.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_XII'/>
<head>Chap. XII. How Haedde succeeded Leutherius in the
bishopric of the West Saxons; how Cuichelm succeeded
Putta in the bishopric of the church of Rochester, and
was himself succeeded by Gebmund; and who were then
bishops of the Northumbrians. [673-681 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Leutherius was the fourth bishop of the West Saxons;
for Birinus was the first, Agilbert the second, and Wini
the third.<note place='foot'>For these bishops, cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>III, 7</ref>.</note> When Coinwalch,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> He died in 672 (Sax. Chron.). Of the sub-kings the
most prominent were Aescwine and Centwine, a brother of Coinwalch.
The Saxon Chronicle gives a different account. According
to it, Coinwalch's widow, Sexburg, reigned for one year after
him and was succeeded by Aescwine, who was succeeded by
Centwine.</note> in whose reign the said
Leutherius was made bishop, died, the sub-kings took
upon them the government of the nation, and dividing it
among themselves, held it for about ten years; and
during their rule he died, and Haedde<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>III, 7</ref>, and for his character, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>V, 18</ref>. The Saxon Chronicle
says he succeeded in 676 and died in 703. Bede places his death
in 705 (<ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>V, 18</ref>).</note> succeeded him in
the bishopric, having been consecrated by Theodore, in
the city of London. During his episcopate, Caedwalla,<note place='foot'>Cc. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XV'>15</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVI'>16</ref>, and <ref target='Book_V_Chap_VII'>V, 7</ref>. He was of Ceaulin's line (<ref target='Book_II_Chap_V'>II, 5</ref>) and so
belonged to a younger branch of the West Saxon royal house.
Welsh writers confuse him with the British king, Caedwalla
(<ref target='Book_II_Chap_XX'>II, 20</ref>), and with his son, Cadwalader.</note>
having subdued and removed the sub-kings, took upon
himself the supreme authority. When he had held it for
two years, and whilst the same bishop still governed the
church, at length impelled by love of the heavenly kingdom,
he quitted it and, going away to Rome, ended his
days there, as shall be said more fully hereafter.
</p>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 676, when Ethelred, king of
the Mercians,<note place='foot'>A son of Penda. He succeeded his brother Wulfhere in 675.
In 704 he became a monk (<ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>V, 24</ref>) and afterwards Abbot of Bardney
Monastery (cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XI'>III, 11</ref>), which he is said to have founded. His invasion
of Kent was probably provoked by an attempt on the part of
that kingdom, at Wulfhere's death, to resume a position of independence
towards Mercia. In spite of his conduct on this raid,
Theodore, Florence of Worcester, and others, speak of the saintliness
of his character.</note> ravaged Kent with a hostile army, and
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
profaned churches and monasteries, without regard to
pity, or the fear of God, in the general destruction he laid
waste the city of Rochester; Putta,<note place='foot'>Cc. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_II'>2</ref> (and note), <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_V'>5</ref>.</note> who was bishop,
was absent at that time, but when he understood that
his church was ravaged, and everything taken away from
it, he went to Sexwulf, bishop of the Mercians,<note place='foot'>C. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_VI'>6</ref>, and note, and <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>.</note> and
having received of him a certain church, and a small
piece of land, ended his days there in peace; in no way
endeavouring to restore his bishopric, for, as has been
said above, he was more industrious in ecclesiastical
than in worldly affairs; serving God only in that church,
and going wherever he was desired, to teach Church
music. Theodore consecrated Cuichelm bishop of Rochester
in his stead; but he, not long after, departing
from his bishopric for want of necessaries, and withdrawing
to other parts, Gebmund was put in his place
by Theodore.<note place='foot'>The dates of these changes in the episcopate are uncertain.
Probably Gebmund was consecrated in 678. For his death, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_V_Chap_VIII'>V, 8</ref>
<hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>, and note.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 678, which is the eighth of the
reign of Egfrid, in the month of August, appeared a
star, called a comet, which continued for three months,
rising in the morning, and sending forth, as it were, a
tall pillar of radiant flame. The same year a dissension
broke out between King Egfrid and the most reverend
prelate, Wilfrid, who was driven from his see,<note place='foot'>This was Wilfrid's first expulsion (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>V, 19</ref>). Bede's reticence
on the subject is noteworthy. Egfrid's hostility to his former
friend, Wilfrid, was doubtless caused by Wilfrid's encouragement
of Queen Ethelthryth (cc. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIX'>19</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XX'>20</ref>) in her desire to take the veil. It
was probably increased by Egfrid's second wife, Eormenburg,
who is said to have resented Wilfrid's power and magnificence.
Theodore, carrying out his policy of subdivision, availed himself
of the opportunity afforded by this dissension. He consulted some
of his suffragans (we do not know who they were; it was apparently
at a mixed council of ecclesiastics and laymen), but did not communicate
with Wilfrid, being, no doubt, conscious of the uselessness
of trying to get his consent. Wilfrid, after demanding an
explanation from the archbishop and the king in a Northumbrian
<q>gemot,</q> and receiving no satisfaction, appealed to Rome (cf.
V, 19, p. <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>). For the importance of this step, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Bright, <q>Early
English Church History,</q> pp. 323-326.</note> and two
bishops substituted for him, to preside over the nation
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
of the Northumbrians,<note place='foot'>Probably the intention was that Wilfrid should keep the larger
part of Deira, with his see at York, and that three new dioceses
should be formed. But, on his departure to appeal to Rome, it was
assumed that he had resigned his bishopric, and Bosa was consecrated
Bishop of Deira with his see at York, Eata, Bishop of
the Bernicians, with the option of fixing his see either at Lindisfarne
or Hagustald (Hexham). These two were <q>substituted for
him.</q> Lindsey, which at this time belonged to Northumbria, became
for the first time a separate diocese. When it passed again
to Mercia in 679 it was included in the subdivision of the Mercian
bishopric, and Ethelwin (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi> note 6) became its bishop with
his see at Sidnacaestir (generally identified with Stow, but the
locality is unknown).</note> namely, Bosa,<note place='foot'>He was one of the bishops educated in Hilda's monastery (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi>
c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>). Bede speaks highly of him (V, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_III'>3</ref>, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XX'>20</ref>), and Alcuin calls him
<q>vir sine fraude bonus.</q> He retired from York when Wilfrid was
restored, but appears to have been reinstated on Wilfrid's second
expulsion.</note> to govern the
province of the Deiri; and Eata<note place='foot'>Abbot of Melrose, afterwards of Lindisfarne (<ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVI'>III, 26</ref>, and
note; <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVII'>IV, 27</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_IX'>V, 9</ref>).</note> that of the Bernicians;
the former having his episcopal see in the city of York,
the latter either in the church of Hagustald, or of Lindisfarne;
both of them promoted to the episcopal dignity
from a community of monks. With them also Eadhaed<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVIII'>III, 28</ref>, and this Chapter, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>, and note.</note>
was ordained bishop for the province of Lindsey, which
King Egfrid had but newly acquired, having defeated
Wulfhere and put him to flight;<note place='foot'>In 675. Lindsey which had been Northumbrian under Edwin
and Oswald, had passed through many vicissitudes. Penda conquered
it, Oswy recovered it (in 655), Wulfhere conquered it
again, Egfrid recovered it (675). It passed finally to Mercia under
Ethelred in 679 (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi> this Chapter, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>).</note> and this was the first
bishop of its own which that province had; the second
was Ethelwin;<note place='foot'>III, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XI'>11</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVII'>27</ref>.</note> the third Edgar;<note place='foot'>He was still Bishop of Lindsey in 706, when he signed a charter
of Ethelward, <q>subregulus</q> of the Hwiccas.</note> the fourth
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
Cynibert,<note place='foot'>Preface, p. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, and <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIII'>V, 23</ref>. Simeon of Durham says that he
died in 732.</note> who is there at present. Before Eadhaed, Sexwulf<note place='foot'>Lindsey was at that time subject to Mercia. Sexwulf was expelled
when Egfrid conquered it in 675. When the Mercian
diocese was subdivided, he retained his see at Lichfield (<hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi>
c. 3, p. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, note) as Bishop of the Mercians proper.</note>
was bishop as well of that province as of the Mercians and
Midland Angles; so that, when expelled from Lindsey,
he continued in the government of those provinces.
Eadhaed, Bosa, and Eata, were ordained at York by
archbishop Theodore;<note place='foot'>By Theodore alone. The suffragans did not take part in the
consecration.</note> who also, three years after the
departure of Wilfrid, added two bishops to their number:
Tunbert,<note place='foot'>In 681 a fresh subdivision took place. The Bernician diocese
was divided, Eata retaining Lindisfarne and giving up Hexham to
Tunbert. Afterwards Eata retired from Lindisfarne in favour of
Cuthbert and took Hexham (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVIII'>28</ref>). Tunbert had been
Abbot of Gilling (In Getlingum, III, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIV'>14</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>). He was deposed by
Theodore from Hexham three years after his consecration (<hi rend='italic'>v.
infra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVIII'>28</ref>), like Wynfrid, <q>pro culpa cujusdam inobedientiae</q>
(Vita Eatae in <q>Miscellanea Biographica,</q> Surtees Society).</note> appointed to the church of Hagustald, Eata
still continuing in that of Lindisfarne; and Trumwine<note place='foot'>His see was not at Whitern among the Picts of Galloway, as
has been supposed (Florence of Worcester, Richard of Hexham,
and others), but at the monastery of Abercorn on the Forth (<ref target='Book_I_Chap_XII'>I, 12</ref>;
<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVI'>IV, 26</ref>), the Picts north of the Forth being at this time subject to
Northumbria. After Egfrid's disastrous expedition in 685, they
freed themselves from Northumbrian rule, the see was abandoned,
and Trumwine retired to Whitby (c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVI'>26</ref>). We hear of him as one
of the deputation to Cuthbert in 684 (c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVIII'>28</ref>).</note> to
the province of the Picts, which at that time was subject
to English rule. Eadhaed returning from Lindsey, because
Ethelred had recovered that province,<note place='foot'>In 679; <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, note 5.</note> was placed
by Theodore over the church of Ripon.<note place='foot'>Whether Ripon became for a time an episcopal see seems
doubtful. In <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVIII'>III, 28</ref>, Bede says distinctly that Eadhaed became
<q>praesul</q> of the church there, and it does not seem consistent
with his use to understand it as = abbot. Probably there was an
attempt to subdivide the diocese of Deira (Eddius mentions it as
one of Wilfrid's grievances), but the scheme was abandoned when
Wilfrid was restored in 705. Ripon did not finally become an
episcopal see till 1836.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_XIII'/>
<head>Chap. XIII. How Bishop Wilfrid converted the province
of the South Saxons to Christ. [681 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
But Wilfrid was expelled from his bishopric, and having
long travelled in many lands, went to Rome,<note place='foot'>For a fuller account, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>V, 19</ref>, and notes.</note> and afterwards
returned to Britain. Though he could not, by
reason of the enmity of the aforesaid king, be received
into his own country or diocese, yet he could not be
restrained from the ministry of the Gospel; for, taking
his way into the province of the South Saxons,<note place='foot'>For the early importance of this kingdom under Aelli, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_II_Chap_V'>II, 5</ref>.
It had become a small insignificant nation, cut off from its neighbours
by forests (the <q>Andredsweald</q>) and marshes, and though
we read (<ref target='Book_III_Chap_XX'>III, 20</ref>) that Damian, bishop of Rochester, was of the
South Saxon race, it was almost untouched by Christian influences.</note> which
extends from Kent to the south and west, as far as the
West Saxons, containing land of 7,000 families, and was
at that time still in bondage to pagan rites, he administered
to them the Word of faith, and the Baptism of
salvation. Ethelwalch,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XV'>15</ref>.</note> king of that nation, had been,
not long before, baptized in the province of the Mercians,
at the instance of King Wulfhere,<note place='foot'>He also brought about the reconversion of the East Saxons by
sending Bishop Jaruman to them. Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXX'>III, 30</ref>.</note> who was present, and
received him as his godson when he came forth from the
font, and in token of this adoption gave him two provinces,
to wit, the Isle of Wight, and the province of the
Meanware, in the country of the West Saxons.<note place='foot'>Wulfhere had invaded Wessex, probably in 661 (Sax. Chron.),
and conquered the Isle of Wight and the district of the Meanware,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the district from Southampton Water to the South Downs.
The inhabitants were Jutes. The name survives in the hundreds,
Meonstoke, and East and West Meon. For the termination
<q>ware</q> = dwellers, cf. Lindisfari, Cantuarii, Boructuari, etc.</note> The
bishop, therefore, with the king's consent, or rather to his
great joy, cleansed in the sacred font the foremost ealdormen
and thegns of that country; and the priests, Eappa,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIV'>14</ref>.</note>
and Padda, and Burghelm, and Oiddi, either then, or
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
afterwards, baptized the rest of the people. The queen,
whose name was Eabae, had been baptized in her own
country, the province of the Hwiccas.<note place='foot'>Cf. II, 2, p. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, note 2.</note> She was the
daughter of Eanfrid, the brother of Aenhere,<note place='foot'>They were probably joint kings of the Hwiccas.</note> who were
both Christians, as were their people; but all the province
of the South Saxons was ignorant of the Name of
God and the faith. But there was among them a certain
monk of the Scottish nation, whose name was Dicul,<note place='foot'><q>Scottish,</q> as usual, means Irish. There is another Dicul
mentioned in <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIX'>III, 19</ref>. Stevenson suggests the identification of this
Dicul with the Irish monk who wrote a geographical work, the
<q>De Mensura Orbis Terrae,</q> but he lived in the ninth century.</note>
who had a very small monastery, at the place called
Bosanhamm,<note place='foot'>Bosham, near Chichester. It was the favourite South Saxon
abode of Harold and Godwine (Freeman, <q>Norman Conquest</q>).</note> encompassed by woods and seas, and in
it there were five or six brothers, who served the Lord
in humility and poverty; but none of the natives cared
either to follow their course of life, or hear their
preaching.
</p>

<p>
But Bishop Wilfrid, while preaching the Gospel to the
people, not only delivered them from the misery of eternal
damnation, but also from a terrible calamity of temporal
death. For no rain had fallen in that district for three
years before his arrival in the province, whereupon a
grievous famine fell upon the people and pitilessly destroyed
them; insomuch that it is said that often forty
or fifty men, wasted with hunger, would go together to
some precipice, or to the sea-shore, and there, hand in
hand, in piteous wise cast them themselves down either
to perish by the fall, or be swallowed up by the waves.
But on the very day on which the nation received the
Baptism of the faith, there fell a soft but plentiful rain;
the earth revived, the fields grew green again, and the
season was pleasant and fruitful. Thus the old superstition
was cast away, and idolatry renounced, the heart
and flesh of all rejoiced in the living God, for they perceived
that He Who is the true God had enriched them
by His heavenly grace with both inward and outward
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
blessings. For the bishop, when he came into the province,
and found so great misery from famine there,
taught them to get their food by fishing; for their sea
and rivers abounded in fish, but the people had no skill
to take any of them, except eels alone. The bishop's
men having gathered eel-nets everywhere, cast them
into the sea, and by the blessing of God took three
hundred fishes of divers sorts, which being divided
into three parts, they gave a hundred to the poor, a
hundred to those of whom they had the nets, and kept
a hundred for their own use. By this benefit the bishop
gained the affections of them all, and they began more
readily at his preaching to hope for heavenly blessings,
seeing that by his help they had received those which
are temporal.
</p>

<p>
At this time, King Ethelwalch gave to the most
reverend prelate, Wilfrid, land to the extent of eighty-seven
families, to maintain his company who were
wandering in exile. The place is called Selaeseu,<note place='foot'>Selsey, the island of the seal (<q>sea-calf</q>), south of Chichester.
It was a royal <q>vill.</q> It became the episcopal see for the South
Saxons at some time about 709 (cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>V, 18</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi> and note),
transferred to Chichester in 1075.</note> that
is, the Island of the Sea-Calf; it is encompassed by the
sea on all sides, except the west, where is an entrance
about the cast of a sling in width; which sort of place is
by the Latins called a peninsula, by the Greeks, a cherronesos.
Bishop Wilfrid, having this place given him,
founded therein a monastery, chiefly of the brethren he
had brought with him, and established a rule of life; and
his successors are known to be there to this day. He
himself, both in word and deed performed the duties of
a bishop in those parts during the space of five years,
until the death of King Egfrid,<note place='foot'>Egfrid fell at the battle of Nechtansmere in 685 (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVI'>26</ref>),
and Wilfrid was restored to his bishopric <q>in the second year of
Aldfrid,</q> Egfrid's successor (V, 19, p. <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>). He was in Wessex
with Caedwalla for part of the year 686 (cf. c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVI'>16</ref>).</note> and was justly honoured
by all. And forasmuch as the king, together with the
said place, gave him all the goods that were therein,
with the lands and men, he instructed all the people in
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
the faith of Christ, and cleansed them in the water of
Baptism. Among whom were two hundred and fifty
bondsmen and bondswomen, all of whom he saved by
Baptism from slavery to the Devil, and in like manner,
by giving them their liberty, set them free from slavery
to man.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_XIV'/>
<head>Chap. XIV. How a pestilence ceased through the intercession
of King Oswald. [681-686 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In this monastery, at that time, certain special manifestations
of the heavenly grace are said to have been
shown forth; in as much as the tyranny of the Devil had
been recently cast out and Christ had begun to reign
there. Of these I have thought it proper to perpetuate
the memory of one which the most reverend Bishop
Acca<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIII'>III, 13</ref>, note.</note> was wont often to relate to me, affirming that
it had been told him by most creditable brothers of the
same monastery. About the same time that this province
had received the faith of Christ, a grievous pestilence
fell upon many provinces of Britain; which, also, by the
Divine dispensation, reached to the aforesaid monastery,
then governed by the most religious priest of Christ,
Eappa;<note place='foot'>C. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIII'>13</ref>.</note> and many, as well of those that had come
thither with the bishop, as of those of the same province
of the South Saxons who had been lately called to the
faith, were snatched away out of this world. The
brethren, therefore, thought fit to keep a fast of three
days, and humbly to implore the Divine goodness to
vouchsafe to have mercy on them, either by delivering
from instant death those that were in danger by reason
of the disease, or by saving those who were hurried out
of this life from the eternal damnation of their souls.
</p>

<p>
There was at that time in the monastery, a little boy,
of the Saxon nation, lately called to the faith, who had
been attacked by the same infirmity, and had long kept
his bed. On the second day of the aforesaid fasting and
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
prayer, it happened about the second hour of the day,
that this boy was left alone in the place where he lay
sick, when on a sudden, through the Divine disposition,
the most blessed chiefs of the Apostles vouchsafed to
appear to him; for he was a boy of a very simple and
gentle disposition, and with sincere devotion observed
the mysteries of the faith which he had received. The
Apostles therefore, greeting him with loving words, said,
<q rend='pre'>My son, fear not death, concerning which thou art
troubled; for this day we will bring thee to the kingdom
of Heaven; but first thou must needs wait till the Masses
are celebrated, that having received thy voyage provision,<note place='foot'>This English equivalent for <q>viaticum</q> is used by Stapleton
in his translation (1565).</note>
the Body and Blood of our Lord, and so being
set free from sickness and death, thou mayest be taken
up to the everlasting joys in Heaven.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Call therefore to thee the priest, Eappa, and tell
him, that the Lord has heard your prayers, and has
favourably looked upon your devotion and your fast,
and not one more shall die of this plague, either in the
monastery or the lands adjacent to it; but all your people
who any where labour under this sickness, shall be raised
up from their weakness, and restored to their former
health, saving thee alone, who art this day to be delivered
from death, and to be carried into Heaven, to
behold our Lord Christ, whom thou hast faithfully
served. This favour the Divine mercy has vouchsafed
to grant you, through the intercession of the godly King
Oswald, beloved of God, who formerly nobly ruled over
the nation of the Northumbrians, with the authority of
a temporal kingdom and the devotion of Christian piety
which leads to the eternal kingdom. For this very day
that king was killed in body by the infidels in war, and
straightway taken up to Heaven to the everlasting joys
of souls, and brought into fellowship with the number of
the elect. Let them look in their records,<note place='foot'>Calendars to show the proper days for commemorative Masses,
cf. <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi> <q>chronicle</q> (<q>annale</q>). The burial was generally on
the day of death, hence <q>depositio</q> of the festival of a saint.</note> wherein the
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
burial of the dead is set down, and they will find that he
was, this day, as we have said, taken out of this world.
Let them, therefore, celebrate Masses in all the oratories
of this monastery, either in thanksgiving because their
prayers are heard, or else in memory of the aforesaid
King Oswald, who once governed their nation,<note place='foot'>It must be remembered that this was a monastery of Northumbrians.
But Oswald is said to have held an <q>imperium</q> over
all England except Kent (<ref target='Book_II_Chap_V'>II, 5</ref>).</note> and
therefore humbly prayed to the Lord for them, as for
converts of his nation; and let all the brethren assemble
in the church, and all communicate in the heavenly
Sacrifices, and so let them cease to fast, and refresh the
body also with the food that belongs to it.</q>
</p>

<p>
The boy called the priest, and repeated all these
words to him; and the priest carefully inquired after the
habit and form of the men that had appeared to him.
He answered, <q>Their habit was altogether noble, and
their countenances most pleasant and beautiful, such as
I had never seen before, nor did I think there could be
any men so fair and comely. One of them indeed was
shorn like a clerk, the other had a long beard; and they
said that one of them was called Peter, the other Paul;
and they were the servants of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ, sent by Him from Heaven to protect our
monastery.</q> The priest believed what the boy said, and
going thence immediately, looked in his chronicle, and
found that King Oswald had been killed on that very
day. He then called the brethren, ordered dinner to be
provided, Masses to be said, and all of them to communicate
as usual; causing also a part of the same
Sacrifice of the Lord's Oblation to be carried to the
sick boy.
</p>

<p>
Soon after this, the boy died, on that same day; and
by his death proved that the words which he had heard
from the Apostles of Christ were true. And this moreover
bore witness to the truth of his words, that none
besides himself, belonging to the same monastery, was
taken away at that time. And without doubt, by this
vision, many that heard of it were wonderfully excited
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
to implore the Divine mercy in adversity, and to submit
to the wholesome remedy of fasting. From that time,
the day of commemoration of that king and soldier of
Christ began to be yearly honoured with the celebration
of Masses, not only in that monastery, but in many
other places.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_XV'/>
<head>Chap. XV. How King Caedwalla, king of the Gewissae,
having slain Ethelwalch, wasted that Province with cruel
slaughter and devastation. [685 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the meantime, Caedwalla,<note place='foot'>C. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>12</ref>, note.</note> a young man of great
vigour, of the royal race of the Gewissae,<note place='foot'>The West Saxons, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_II_Chap_V'>II, 5</ref> and note. Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>III, 7</ref>.</note> an exile from
his country, came with an army, slew Ethelwalch,<note place='foot'>C. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIII'>13</ref>.</note> and
wasted that province with cruel slaughter and devastation;
but he was soon expelled by Berthun and Andhun,
the king's ealdormen, who held in succession the government
of the province. The first of them was afterwards
killed by the same Caedwalla, when he was king of the
Gewissae, and the province was reduced to more grievous
slavery: Ini,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_V_Chap_VII'>V, 7</ref> <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi> Like Caedwalla, a descendant of Ceaulin,
<q>A king who deserves the name of great</q> (Bright), great both as
a conqueror and a legislator. He was probably the first king to
introduce written law into Wessex, viz., his famous <q>Dooms,</q>
enacted by a West Saxon witenagemot in the early years of his
reign.</note> likewise, who reigned after Caedwalla, oppressed
that country with the like servitude for many
years; for which reason, during all that time, they could
have no bishop of their own; but their first bishop, Wilfrid,
having been recalled home, they were subject to
the bishop of the Gewissae, that is, the West Saxons,
who were in the city of Venta.<note place='foot'>Winchester. At this time Haedde was bishop there (c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>12</ref>).
For the creation of a South Saxon bishopric <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIII'>V, 18</ref> <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_XVI'/>
<head>Chap. XVI. How the Isle of Wight received Christian
inhabitants, and two royal youths of that island were
killed immediately after Baptism. [686 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
After Caedwalla had obtained possession of the kingdom
of the Gewissae, he took also the Isle of Wight,
which till then was entirely given over to idolatry, and
by merciless slaughter endeavoured to destroy all the inhabitants
thereof, and to place in their stead people from
his own province; binding himself by a vow, though it
is said that he was not yet regenerated in Christ, to give
the fourth part of the land and of the spoil to the Lord,
if he took the island. He fulfilled this vow by giving the
same for the service of the Lord to Bishop Wilfrid, who
happened at the time to have come thither from his own
people.<note place='foot'>Eddius says that Caedwalla sent for him and made him his
counsellor; Wilfrid had befriended him when in exile.</note> The measure of that island, according to the
computation of the English, is of twelve hundred families,
wherefore an estate of three hundred families was given
to the Bishop. The part which he received, he committed
to one of his clerks called Bernwin, who was his sister's
son, assigning to him a priest, whose name was Hiddila,
to administer the Word and laver of life to all that would
be saved.
</p>

<p>
Here I think it ought not to be omitted that, as the first
fruits of those of that island who believed and were saved,
two royal boys, brothers to Arwald, king of the island,<note place='foot'>Roger of Wendover calls him a <foreign rend='italic'>subregulus</foreign>.</note>
were crowned with the special grace of God. For when
the enemy approached, they made their escape out of the
island, and crossed over into the neighbouring province
of the Jutes.<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XV'>I, 15</ref>.</note> Coming to the place called At the Stone,<note place='foot'>Stoneham on the Itchen, near Southampton. For the preposition,
cf. II, 14, p. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, note 5.</note>
they thought to be concealed from the victorious king,
but they were betrayed and ordered to be killed. This
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
being made known to a certain abbot and priest, whose
name was Cynibert, who had a monastery not far from
there, at a place called Hreutford,<note place='foot'>Redbridge in Hampshire.</note> that is, the Ford of
Reeds, he came to the king, who then lay in concealment
in those parts to be cured of the wounds which he had
received whilst he was fighting in the Isle of Wight, and
begged of him, that if the boys must needs be killed, he
might be allowed first to instruct them in the mysteries
of the Christian faith. The king consented, and the
bishop having taught them the Word of truth, and
cleansed them in the font of salvation, assured to them
their entrance into the kingdom of Heaven. Then the executioner
came, and they joyfully underwent the temporal
death, through which they did not doubt they were to
pass to the life of the soul, which is everlasting. Thus,
after this manner, when all the provinces of Britain had
received the faith of Christ, the Isle of Wight also received
the same; yet because it was suffering under the
affliction of foreign subjection, no man there received the
office or see of a bishop, before Daniel, who is now
bishop of the West Saxons.<note place='foot'>Pref., p. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> and note; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>V, 18</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
The island is situated opposite the borders of the South
Saxons and the Gewissae, being separated from it by a
sea, three miles wide, which is called Solvente.<note place='foot'>The Solent.</note> In this
sea, the two tides of the ocean, which break upon Britain
all round its coasts from the boundless northern ocean,
daily meet in conflict beyond the mouth of the river
Homelea,<note place='foot'>The Hamble.</note> which runs into the aforesaid sea, through
the lands of the Jutes, belonging to the country of the
Gewissae; and after this struggle of the tides, they fall
back and return into the ocean whence they come.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_XVII'/>
<head>Chap. XVII. Of the Synod held in the plain of Haethfelth,
Archbishop Theodore being president. [680 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
About this time, Theodore being informed that the faith
of the Church at Constantinople was much perplexed by
the heresy of Eutyches,<note place='foot'>Eutyches was Archimandrite of a monastery near Constantinople.
He was condemned by the synod of Constantinople in 448,
and by the council of Chalcedon in 451. He was the originator of
the Monophysite heresy which denied the existence of the two
natures, the Divine and human, in the Incarnate Son. Monothelitism,
which was the subject of the controversy alluded to here,
arose out of an attempt to reconcile the Monophysites by the assertion
of one will and operation (activity, ἐνέργεια) in our Lord. It
was condemned in the General Council of Constantinople, 680-681.
In anticipation of this council various provincial synods were held,
as well as the synod at Rome assembled by Pope Agatho, at which
Wilfrid represented the English church (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>V. 19</ref>).</note> and desiring that the Churches
of the English, over which he presided, should remain
free from all such taint, convened an assembly of venerable
bishops and many learned men, and diligently inquired
into the faith of each. He found them all of one
mind in the Catholic faith, and this he caused to be committed
to writing by the authority of the synod as a
memorial, and for the instruction of succeeding generations;
the beginning of which document is as follows:
</p>

<p>
<q>In the name of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ,
under the rule of our most pious lords, Egfrid, king of
of the Northumbrians, in the tenth year of his reign, the
seventeenth of September, the eighth indiction; Ethelred,
king of the Mercians, in the sixth year of his reign;
Aldwulf king of the East Angles, in the seventeenth year
of his reign; and Hlothere, king of Kent, in the seventh
year of his reign;<note place='foot'>The year was 680 (cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>V, 24</ref>), but it falls in the eighth year of
Hlothere of Kent, who succeeded in July, 673. For Egfrid, <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi>
c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_V'>5</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi> Probably he succeeded in 671. Ethelred of Mercia
succeeded in 675 (<ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>V, 24</ref>), so that Sept., 680, might easily fall in
his sixth year; Aldwulf, of East Anglia, in 663 or 664 (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XV'>II, 15</ref>;
<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIII'>IV, 23</ref>). The eighth indiction, whether Cæsarean or Pontifical
(<hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_V'>5</ref>, note), includes Sept. 17, 680.</note> Theodore, by the grace of God, archbishop
of the island of Britain, and of the city of Canterbury,
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
being president, and the other venerable bishops
of the island of Britain sitting with him, the holy Gospels
being laid before them, at the place which, in the Saxon
tongue, is called Haethfelth,<note place='foot'>Generally identified with Hatfield in Hertfordshire, but T. Kerslake
(<q>Vestiges of the supremacy of Mercia</q>) supposes it to be
Clovesho (Cliff-at-Hoe); <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_V'>5</ref>, and note.</note> we conferred together, and
set forth the right and orthodox faith, as our Lord Jesus
Christ in the flesh delivered the same to His disciples,
who beheld His Presence and heard His words, and as it
is delivered by the creed of the holy fathers, and by all
holy and universal synods in general, and by the consent
of all approved doctors of the Catholic Church. We,
therefore, following them, in piety and orthodoxy, and
professing accordance with their divinely inspired doctrine,
do believe agreeably to it, and with the holy fathers
confess the Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, to be properly
and truly a Trinity consubstantial in Unity, and
Unity in Trinity, that is, one God in three Subsistences or
consubstantial persons, of equal glory and honour.</q>
</p>

<p>
And after much more of the same sort, appertaining
to the confession of the right faith, this holy synod added
to its document, <q>We acknowledge the five holy and
general councils<note place='foot'>The five Oecumenical Councils which had been held before this
time, viz., Nicaea, in 325; Constantinople, in 381-382; Ephesus, in
431; Chalcedon, in 451; Constantinople, in 553. For the Arian
heresy, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_I_Chap_VIII'>I, 8</ref> (and note), where <q>madness</q> (<q>vesania</q>) is, as
here, the word used to describe it. Macedonius was a <q>semi-Arian,</q>
Eudoxius an Arian; both were bishops of Constantinople.
Nestorius was consecrated Bishop of Constantinople in 428. He
popularized the heresy which originated with Theodore, Bishop of
Mopsuestia, 392-428. It consisted in emphasizing the human element
in our Lord's Nature to the practical exclusion of the Divine,
as a reaction against Apollinarianism which explained away His
real Humanity. <q>The Christ of Nestorius was, after all, simply a
deified man, not God incarnate</q> (Gore, <q>Bampton Lectures</q>).
Theodoret, Bishop of Cyrus in Syria (died 457) and Ibas, Bishop
of Edessa, 435-457, were disciples of Theodore, Bishop of Mopsuestia,
and opponents of Cyril of Alexandria, who is accused of
Apollinarianism in the letter of Ibas.</note> of the blessed fathers acceptable to
God; that is, of the 318 assembled at Nicaea, against the
most impious Arius and his tenets; and at Constantinople,
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
of 150, against the madness of Macedonius and Eudoxius,
and their tenets; and at Ephesus, for the first
time, of 200, against the most wicked Nestorius, and his
tenets; and at Chalcedon, of 630, against Eutyches and
Nestorius, and their tenets; and again, at Constantinople,
in a fifth council, in the time of Justinian the younger,<note place='foot'>Justinian I, 527-565.</note>
against Theodorus, and the epistles of Theodoret and
Ibas, and their tenets in opposition to Cyril.</q> And again
a little lower, <q>the synod held in the city of Rome, in the
time of the blessed Pope Martin,<note place='foot'>The first Lateran Council, in 649, against the Monothelites.
Martin I, Pope 649-655, died in the Crimea, exiled and imprisoned
by the Emperor Constans II in consequence of his resistance to
the heresy.</note> in the eighth indiction,
and in the ninth year of the most pious Emperor Constantine,<note place='foot'>Constantine IV, more generally known as Constans II, 641-688.</note>
we also acknowledge. And we glorify our Lord Jesus
Christ, as they glorified Him, neither adding aught nor
taking away; anathematizing with hearts and lips those
whom they anathematized, and receiving those whom
they received; glorifying God the Father, Who is without
beginning, and His only-begotten Son, begotten of the
Father before the worlds, and the Holy Ghost proceeding
ineffably from the Father and the Son,<note place='foot'>We have here, under the auspices of an Eastern Archbishop, a
clear enunciation of the doctrine which afterwards divided the
east and west: the Double Procession of the Holy Spirit. The
<q>filioque</q> clause, which formed no part of the Nicene Creed, nor of
its Constantinopolitan recension, had been formally adopted at the
Third Council of Toledo in 589 and at subsequent Spanish councils.
The English prelates at Hatfield were probably influenced by this
precedent.</note> even as those
holy Apostles, prophets, and doctors, whom we have
above-mentioned, did declare. And all we, who, with
Archbishop Theodore, have thus set forth the Catholic
faith, thereto subscribe.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_XVIII'/>
<head>Chap. XVIII. Of John, the precentor of the Apostolic see,
who came into Britain to teach. [680 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Among those who were present at this synod, and confirmed
the decrees of the Catholic faith, was the venerable
John,<note place='foot'>Cf. Bede's <q>History of the Abbots,</q> § 6.</note> archchanter of the church of the holy Apostle
Peter,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, St. Peter's at Rome. The Monastery of St. Martin was
on the Esquiline. It was founded by Pope Symmachus in honour
of SS. Sylvester and Martin.</note> and abbot of the monastery of the blessed Martin,
who had come lately from Rome, by order of Pope
Agatho, together with the most reverend Abbot Biscop,
surnamed Benedict,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_I'>1</ref>, notes. (For his life, v. Bede's <q>History of the Abbots,</q>
and the Anon. <q>History of the Abbots.</q>) He has not been
mentioned before in this history. His ecclesiastical surname was
Benedict, <q>Baducing</q> was probably his patronymic. He was of
noble birth and a thegn of King Oswy, born in 628. He was the
companion of Wilfrid on his first journey to Rome (<ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>V, 19</ref>). In his
native province of Northumbria he founded the monasteries of
Wearmouth (in 674) and Jarrow (<hi rend='italic'>circ.</hi> 681), where Bede's life was
passed, and enriched them with furniture, vestments, relics, pictures,
and a library of valuable books which he brought from the
Continent. The rule which he framed for his monasteries was
Benedictine, compiled from seventeen different monasteries which
he had visited. He died Jan. 12, 689.</note> of whom mention has been made
above. For the said Benedict, having built a monastery
in Britain, in honour of the most blessed chief of the
Apostles, at the mouth of the river Wear, went to Rome
with Ceolfrid,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXI'>V, 21</ref>. Bede's <q>History of the Abbots,</q> and Anon. <q>History
of the Abbots.</q> He added to Benedict's library. He had been a
monk at Ripon under Wilfrid, became Abbot of Jarrow in 681, and
of Wearmouth in addition to Jarrow in 688. In 716 he resigned
and set out for Rome, but died at Langres in the same year. Bede
was trained under him (<ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>V, 24</ref>) and was probably the little boy left
alone with him to recite the offices when the pestilence of 686
swept away the monks. (Anon. Hist. Abb. § 14.)</note> his companion and fellow-labourer in that
work, who was after him abbot of the same monastery;
he had been several times before at Rome, and was now
honourably received by Pope Agatho of blessed memory;
from whom he also asked and obtained, in order to
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
secure the immunities of the monastery which he had
founded, a letter of privilege confirmed by apostolic
authority, according to what he knew to be the will and
grant of King Egfrid, by whose consent and gift of land
he had built that monastery.
</p>

<p>
He was also allowed to take the aforesaid Abbot John
with him into Britain, that he might teach in his monastery
the system of singing throughout the year, as it was
practised at St. Peter's at Rome.<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XX'>II, 20</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>, note.</note> The Abbot John did
as he had been commanded by the Pope, teaching the
singers of the said monastery the order and manner of
singing and reading aloud, and committing to writing
all that was requisite throughout the whole course of the
year for the celebration of festivals; and these writings
are still preserved in that monastery, and have been
copied by many others elsewhere. The said John not
only taught the brothers of that monastery, but such as
had skill in singing resorted from almost all the monasteries
of the same province to hear him, and many invited
him to teach in other places.
</p>

<p>
Besides his task of singing and reading, he had also
received a commission from the Apostolic Pope, carefully
to inform himself concerning the faith of the English
Church, and to give an account thereof on his return to
Rome. For he also brought with him the decision of the
synod of the blessed Pope Martin, held not long before at
Rome,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVII'>17</ref>, and note.</note> with the consent of one hundred and five bishops,
chiefly to refute those who taught that there is but one
operation and will in Christ, and he gave it to be transcribed
in the aforesaid monastery of the most religious
Abbot Benedict. The men who followed such opinion
greatly perplexed the faith of the Church of Constantinople
at that time; but by the help of God they were then
discovered and overcome.<note place='foot'>In the Council of Constantinople, 680-681 (<hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVII'>17</ref> <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi>,
note.)</note> Wherefore, Pope Agatho,
being desirous to be informed concerning the state of the
Church in Britain, as well as in other provinces, and to
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
what extent it was clear from the contagion of heretics,
gave this matter in charge to the most reverend Abbot
John, then appointed to go to Britain. The synod we
have spoken of having been called for this purpose in
Britain, the Catholic faith was found untainted in all,
and a report of the proceedings of the same was given
him to carry to Rome.
</p>

<p>
But in his return to his own country, soon after crossing
the sea, he fell sick and died; and his body, for the sake
of St. Martin, in whose monastery he presided, was by
his friends carried to Tours,<note place='foot'>To St. Martin's own church at Tours, where, as Abbot of
St. Martin's monastery at Rome, it was specially fitting that he
should find burial.</note> and honourably buried; for
he had been kindly entertained by the Church there on his
way to Britain, and earnestly entreated by the brethren,
that in his return to Rome he would take that road, and
visit their Church, and moreover he was there supplied
with men to conduct him on his way, and assist him in
the work enjoined upon him. Though he died by the way,
yet the testimony of the Catholic faith of the English nation
was carried to Rome, and received with great joy by
the Apostolic Pope, and all those that heard or read it.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_XIX'/>
<head>Chap. XIX. How Queen Ethelthryth always preserved
her virginity, and her body suffered no corruption in the
grave. [660-696 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
King Egfrid took to wife Ethelthryth, the daughter of
Anna,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>III, 7</ref>, note.</note> king of the East Angles, of whom mention has
been often made; a man of true religion, and altogether
noble in mind and deed. She had before been given in
marriage to another, to wit, Tondbert, ealdorman<note place='foot'><q>Princeps,</q> A.S. Ealdorman. The county of the Southern
Gyrwas was South Cambridgeshire. Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XX'>III, 20</ref>, note.</note> of the
Southern Gyrwas; but he died soon after he had married
her, and she was given to the aforesaid king. Though
she lived with him twelve years, yet she preserved the
glory of perfect virginity, as I was informed by Bishop
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
Wilfrid, of blessed memory, of whom I inquired, because
some questioned the truth thereof; and he told me that
he was an undoubted witness to her virginity, forasmuch
as Egfrid promised to give him many lands and much
money if he could persuade the queen to consent to fulfil
her marriage duty, for he knew the queen loved no man
more than himself. And it is not to be doubted that this
might take place in our age, which true histories tell us
happened sometimes in former ages, by the help of
the same Lord who promises to abide with us always,
even unto the end of the world. For the divine miracle
whereby her flesh, being buried, could not suffer corruption,
is a token that she had not been defiled by man.
</p>

<p>
She had long asked of the king that he would permit
her to lay aside worldly cares, and to serve only Christ,
the true King, in a monastery; and having at length with
difficulty prevailed, she entered the monastery of the
Abbess Aebba,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXV'>25</ref>. Bede tells us in the <q>Life of Cuthbert,</q> that she was
a half sister of Oswy's on the mother's side. Her name survives
in Ebchester on the Derwent, where she founded a nunnery; in
St. Abb's Head, near which she afterwards founded the double
monastery of Coldingham; and in St. Ebbe's, Oxford. She was
the friend of Cuthbert, and it was to her exhortations to Egfrid
that Wilfrid owed his release from prison.</note> who was aunt to King Egfrid, at the
place called the city of Coludi,<note place='foot'>Coldingham in Berwickshire. It was a mixed monastery.
Cf. c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXV'>25</ref>.</note> having received the veil
of the religious habit from the hands of the aforesaid
Bishop Wilfrid; but a year after she was herself made
abbess in the district called Elge,<note place='foot'>Ely. The Isle of Ely was her jointure from her first husband.
She received the help and support of Aldwulf, king of East Anglia
(<ref target='Book_II_Chap_XV'>II, 15</ref>; IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVII'>17</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>), her cousin (he was the son of Ethelhere and
nephew of Anna). The monastery was founded in 673. It was exempted
from the jurisdiction of the East Anglian bishop, and subject
to Wilfrid.</note> where, having built a
monastery, she began, by the example of a heavenly life
and by her teaching, to be the virgin mother of many
virgins dedicated to God. It is told of her that from the
time of her entering the monastery, she would never
wear any linen but only woollen garments, and would
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
seldom wash in a hot bath, unless just before the greater
festivals, as Easter, Whitsuntide, and the Epiphany, and
then she did it last of all, when the other handmaids of
Christ who were there had been washed, served by her
and her attendants. She seldom ate more than once a
day, excepting on the greater festivals, or some urgent
occasion. Always, except when grievous sickness prevented
her, from the time of matins till day-break, she
continued in the church at prayer. Some also say, that
by the spirit of prophecy she not only foretold the pestilence
of which she was to die, but also, in the presence
of all, revealed the number of those that should be then
snatched away from this world out of her monastery.
She was taken to the Lord, in the midst of her flock,
seven years after she had been made abbess; and, as she
had ordered, was buried among them in a wooden coffin
in her turn, according to the order in which she had
passed away.
</p>

<p>
She was succeeded in the office of abbess by her sister
Sexburg,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_III_Chap_VIII'>III, 8</ref>, cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>III, 7</ref>, note. After her husband's death she acted as
regent for a time, then founded a monastery in the Isle of Sheppey,
and became abbess of it. Thence she retired to Ely, where, after
being a simple nun, she succeeded Ethelthryth as abbess. She
was herself succeeded first at Sheppey, and afterwards at Ely, by
her daughter Ermingild, widow of Wulfhere of Mercia.</note> who had been wife to Earconbert, king of
Kent. This abbess, when her sister had been buried
sixteen years, thought fit to take up her bones, and,
putting them into a new coffin, to translate them into the
church. Accordingly she ordered some of the brothers
to find a stone whereof to make a coffin for this purpose.
They went on board ship, for the district of Ely is on
every side encompassed with water and marshes, and has
no large stones, and came to a small deserted city, not
far from thence, which, in the language of the English,
is called Grantacaestir,<note place='foot'>Grantchester, near Cambridge.</note> and presently, near the city
walls, they found a white marble coffin,<note place='foot'>A Roman sarcophagus. A number of fragments of very ancient
stone coffins have been found there, built into the wall of the church
(Mayor and Lumby).</note> most beautifully
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
wrought, and fitly covered with a lid of the same sort
of stone. Perceiving, therefore, that the Lord had prospered
their journey, they returned thanks to Him and
carried it to the monastery.
</p>

<p>
When the grave was opened and the body of the holy
virgin and bride of Christ was brought into the light of
day, it was found as free from corruption as if she had
died and been buried on that very day; as the aforesaid
Bishop Wilfrid, and many others that know it, testify.
But the physician, Cynifrid, who was present at her
death, and when she was taken up out of the grave, had
more certain knowledge. He was wont to relate that in
her sickness she had a very great tumour under her jaw.
<q>And I was ordered,</q> said he, <q>to lay open that tumour
to let out the noxious matter in it, which I did, and she
seemed to be somewhat more easy for two days, so that
many thought she might recover from her infirmity; but
on the third day she was attacked by the former pains,
and being soon snatched out of the world, she exchanged
all pain and death for everlasting life and health. And
when, so many years after, her bones were to be taken out
of the grave, a pavilion being spread over it, and all the
congregation, the brothers on the one side, and the sisters
on the other, standing about it singing, while the abbess,
with a few others, had gone within to take up and wash
the bones, on a sudden we heard the abbess within cry
out with a loud voice, <q>Glory be to the name of the Lord.</q>
Not long after they called me in, opening the door of the
pavilion, and I found the body of the holy virgin taken
out of the grave and laid on a bed, like one asleep; then
taking off the veil from the face, they also showed me
that the incision which I had made was healed up; so
that, in marvellous wise, instead of the open gaping
wound with which she had been buried, there then appeared
only the slightest trace of a scar. Besides, all
the linen clothes in which the body had been wrapped,
appeared entire and as fresh as if they had been that
very day put about her chaste limbs.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is said that when she was sore troubled with the aforesaid
tumour and pain in her jaw and neck, she took great
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
pleasure in that sort of sickness, and was wont to say, <q>I
know of a surety that I deservedly bear the weight of
my trouble on my neck, for I remember that, when I
was a young maiden, I bore on it the needless weight of
necklaces;<note place='foot'><q>Audrey</q> is the popular form of the name Ethelthryth. A
<q>tawdry lace</q> (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> St. Audrey lace) is a necklace; cf. <q>Winter's
Tale,</q> iv. 3. Hence our word <q>tawdry,</q> which possibly only derives
its meaning from the cheap necklaces, etc., sold at St. Audrey's
fair at Ely on the saint's day, October 17 (the day of her
translation), but may also be a reminiscence of this anecdote.</note> and therefore I believe the Divine goodness
would have me endure the pain in my neck, that so I
may be absolved from the guilt of my needless levity,
having now, instead of gold and pearls, the fiery heat of
a tumour rising on my neck.</q> It happened also that by
the touch of those same linen clothes devils were expelled
from bodies possessed, and other diseases were at divers
times healed; and the coffin wherein she was first buried
is said to have cured some of infirmities of the eyes, who,
praying with their heads resting upon that coffin, were
presently relieved of the pain or dimness in their eyes.
So they washed the virgin's body, and having clothed it
in new garments, brought it into the church, and laid it in
the sarcophagus that had been brought, where it is held
in great veneration to this day. The sarcophagus was
found in a wonderful manner to fit the virgin's body as
if it had been made purposely for her, and the place for
the head, which was fashioned separately, appeared exactly
shaped to the measurement of her head.
</p>

<p>
Elge is in the province of the East Angles, a district
of about six hundred families, of the nature of an island,
encompassed, as has been said, with marshes or waters,
and therefore it has its name from the great plenty of
eels taken in those marshes; there the aforesaid handmaid
of Christ desired to have a monastery, because, as
we have before mentioned, she came, according to the
flesh, of that same province of the East Angles.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_XX'/>
<head>Chap. XX. A Hymn concerning her.</head>

<p>
It seems fitting to insert in this history a hymn concerning
virginity, which we composed in elegiac verse many
years ago, in praise and honour of the same queen and
bride of Christ, and therefore truly a queen, because the
bride of Christ; and to imitate the method of Holy
Scripture, wherein many songs are inserted in the history,
and these, as is well known, are composed in metre and
verse.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Trinity,<note place='foot'>The poem is (1) alphabetical; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the first letters of the hexameter
lines form the alphabet, and there are four additional couplets
at the end, in which the first letters form the word <q>Amen</q>;
(2) <q>serpentine,</q> reciprocal or echoing; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the last half of the
pentameter repeats the first two and a half feet of the hexameter.
Such verses are common in mediaeval Latin, and are doubtless a
development from the occasional instances of echoing lines which
occur in the classical poets (<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Martial VIII, xxi, 1-2; IX, 97;
Ovid, Fasti IV, 365-366), as the extreme form of that impulse to
give emphasis by iteration which is a marked feature of Latin
poetry, particularly of the Ovidian elegiac.</note> Gracious, Divine, Who rulest all the ages;
favour my task, Trinity, Gracious, Divine.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Let Maro sound the trumpet of war, let us sing the
gifts of peace; the gifts of Christ we sing, let Maro
sound the trumpet of war.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Chaste is my song, no rape of guilty Helen; light
tales shall be told by the wanton, chaste is my song.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I will tell of gifts from Heaven, not wars of hapless
Troy; I will tell of gifts from Heaven, wherein the
earth is glad.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Lo! the high God comes to the womb of a holy
virgin, to be the Saviour of men, lo! the high God comes.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>A hallowed maid gives birth to Him Who gave the
world its being; Mary, the gate of God, a maiden gives
Him birth.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The company of her fellows rejoices over the Virgin
Mother of Him Who wields the thunder; a shining virgin
band, the company of her fellows rejoices.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Her honour has made many a blossom to spring
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
from that pure shoot, virgin blossoms her honour has
made to spring.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Scorched by the fierce flames, the maiden Agatha<note place='foot'>Agatha suffered 5th February, 251 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, in the Decian persecution,
according to her <q>Acta</q> (the Diocletian, according to the
Martyrology and Aldhelm). Eulalia was burnt to death at the age
of twelve in the Diocletian persecution, having denounced herself.
The legend tells that a white dove hovered over her ashes till snow
fell and covered them. Tecla, the disciple of St. Paul, is said to
have been the first virgin martyr. She was miraculously saved
from her martyrdom and died in peace long after. Euphemia was
torn by wild beasts at Chalcedon in 307 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> in the Diocletian persecution.
Asterius, Bishop of Amasea, 400 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, says that he saw
a tablet in the church at Chalcedon depicting her sufferings. We
have thus very early evidence for her history. Agnes is said to
have been beheaded in 304 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, in the Diocletian persecution, at
the age of twelve or thirteen. The date of St. Cecilia is very uncertain;
Fortunatus, Bishop of Poitiers, says that she died <hi rend='italic'>circ.</hi>
176-180 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, but another account places her martyrdom as late as
the time of Diocletian. Her connection with music does not appear
in the legends, and is probably due to the fact that Pope Paschal
endowed the monastery which he built in connection with her
church at Rome to provide for musical services at her tomb day
and night.</note>
yielded not; in like manner Eulalia endures, scorched
by the fierce flames.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The lofty soul of chaste Tecla overcomes the wild
beasts; chaste Euphemia overcomes the accursed wild
beasts.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Agnes joyously laughs at the sword, herself stronger
than steel, Cecilia joyously laughs at the foemen's sword.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Many a triumph is mighty throughout the world
in temperate hearts; throughout the world love of the
temperate life is mighty.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Yea, and our day likewise a peerless maiden has
blessed; peerless our Ethelthryth shines.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Child of a noble sire, and glorious by royal birth,
more noble in her Lord's sight, the child of a noble sire.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Thence she receives queenly honour and a sceptre
in this world; thence she receives honour, awaiting
higher honour above.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>What need, gracious lady, to seek an earthly lord,
even now given to the Heavenly Bridegroom?</q>
</p>

<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Christ is at hand, the Bridegroom (why seek an
earthly lord?) that thou mayst follow even now, methinks,
in the steps of the Mother of Heaven's King, that thou
too mayst be a mother in God.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Twelve years<note place='foot'>She had not been a queen twelve years. The dates are probably
these: she was born about 630 at Ermynge (Ixning) in Suffolk,
and married to Tondbert in 652. Tondbert died in 655, and she was
married to Egfrid (who must then have been only fifteen) in 660.
Egfrid succeeded to the throne in 670 or 671, and it must have been
in 672 that she retired to Coldingham. She was, therefore, queen
for not more than two years, though perhaps we may accept the
statement of the Liber Eliensis that Egfrid was sub-king of Deira
for some years before his accession.</note> she had reigned, a bride dedicated to
God, then in the cloister dwelt, a bride dedicated to God.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>To Heaven all consecrated she lived, abounding in
lofty deeds, then to Heaven all consecrated she gave up
her soul.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Twice eight Novembers<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, she had been buried sixteen years; <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIX'>19</ref>.</note> the maid's fair flesh lay
in the tomb, nor did the maid's fair flesh see corruption
in the tomb.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>This was Thy work, O Christ, that her very garments
were bright and undefiled even in the grave; O
Christ, this was Thy work.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The dark serpent<note place='foot'>Literally the water snake, ὕδρος, used generally for any serpent,
and so = the Devil; <foreign rend='italic'>Chelydrus</foreign> is similarly used (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Ducange).</note> flies before the honour due to the
holy raiment; disease is driven away, and the dark serpent
flies.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Rage fills the foe who of old conquered Eve; exultant
the maiden triumphs and rage fills the foe.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Behold, O bride of God, thy glory upon earth; the
glory that awaits thee in the Heavens behold, O bride
of God.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In gladness thou receivest gifts, bright amidst the
festal torches; behold! the Bridegroom comes, in gladness
thou receivest gifts.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And a new song thou singest to the tuneful harp; a
new-made bride, thou exultest in the tuneful hymn.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>None can part her from them which follow the Lamb
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
enthroned on high, whom none had severed from the
Love enthroned on high.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_XXI'/>
<head>Chap. XXI. How Bishop Theodore made peace between
the kings Egfrid and Ethelred. [679 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the ninth year of the reign of King Egfrid, a great
battle<note place='foot'>The Battle of the Trent in 679 (cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>V, 24</ref>). It was on the
anniversary of Wilfrid's expulsion; he is said to have foretold a
calamity. The place may, perhaps, be identified with Elford-on-Trent,
in Staffordshire; it is supposed that the name may be a
reminiscence of Aelfwine. By this battle Mercia regained Lindsey,
which never again became Northumbrian (cf. c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>12</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>).</note> was fought between him and Ethelred, king of
the Mercians, near the river Trent, and Aelfwine,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXII'>22</ref>, where he is called <q>King Aelfwine,</q> as also twice
in Eddius. He may have been sub-king of Deira.</note>
brother to King Egfrid, was slain, a youth about eighteen
years of age, and much beloved by both provinces; for
King Ethelred had married his sister Osthryth.<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_III_Chap_XI'>III, 11</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>V, 24</ref>. When Wilfrid took refuge in Mercia in 681,
she and her husband expelled him <q>pro adulatione Egfridi regis</q>
(Eddius).</note> There
was now reason to expect a more bloody war, and
more lasting enmity between those kings and their fierce
nations; but Theodore, the bishop, beloved of God, relying
on the Divine aid, by his wholesome admonitions
wholly extinguished the dangerous fire that was breaking
out; so that the kings and their people on both sides
were appeased, and no man was put to death, but only
the due mulct<note place='foot'>The <q>Wergild,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, pecuniary value set upon every man's
life according to his status (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Stubbs, <q>Constitutional History</q>).</note> paid to the king who was the avenger for
the death of his brother; and this peace continued long
after between those kings and between their kingdoms.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_XXII'/>
<head>Chap. XXII. How a certain captive's chains fell off
when Masses were sung for him. [679 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the aforesaid battle, wherein King Aelfwine was
killed, a memorable incident is known to have happened,
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
which I think ought by no means to be passed over in
silence; for the story will be profitable to the salvation
of many. In that battle a youth called Imma, one of
the king's thegns, was struck down, and having lain as
if dead all that day and the next night among the bodies
of the slain, at length he came to himself and revived,
and sitting up, bound his own wounds as best as he
could. Then having rested awhile, he stood up, and
went away to see if he could find any friends to take
care of him; but in so doing he was discovered and
taken by some of the enemy's army, and carried before
their lord, who was one of King Ethelred's nobles.<note place='foot'><q>Comes,</q> A.S. <q>gesith.</q> Above, Imma is described as <q>de
militia ejus juvenis,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, a young <q>king's thegn</q> (the term
applied to him in the A.S. version).</note>
Being asked by him who he was, and fearing to own
himself a thegn, he answered that he was a peasant, a
poor man and married, and he declared that he had
come to the war with others like himself to bring provisions
to the army. The noble entertained him, and
ordered his wounds to be dressed, and when he began
to recover, to prevent his escaping, he ordered him to be
bound at night. But he could not be bound, for as soon
as they that bound him were gone, his bonds were loosed.
</p>

<p>
Now he had a brother called Tunna, who was a priest
and abbot of a monastery in the city which is still called
Tunnacaestir after him.<note place='foot'>Towcester (<q>Tovecester,</q> in Domesday Book) in Northamptonshire,
Doncaster, and Littleborough have all been suggested,
but the place has not been identified. The name indicates that it
had been a Roman station.</note> This man, hearing that his
brother had been killed in the battle, went to see if haply
he could find his body; and finding another very like
him in all respects, he believed it to be his. So he carried
it to his monastery, and buried it honourably, and took
care often to say Masses for the absolution of his soul;
the celebration whereof occasioned what I have said,
that none could bind him but he was presently loosed
again. In the meantime, the noble that had kept him
was amazed, and began to inquire why he could not be
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
bound; whether perchance he had any spells about him,
such as are spoken of in stories. He answered that he
knew nothing of those arts; <q>but I have,</q> said he, <q>a
brother who is a priest in my country, and I know that
he, supposing me to be killed, is saying frequent Masses
for me; and if I were now in the other life, my soul
there, through his intercession, would be delivered from
penalty.</q>
</p>

<p>
When he had been a prisoner with the noble some time,
those who attentively observed him, by his countenance,
habit, and discourse, took notice, that he was not of the
meaner sort, as he had said, but of some quality. The
noble then privately sending for him, straitly questioned
him, whence he came, promising to do him no harm on
that account if he would frankly confess who he was.
This he did, declaring that he had been a thegn of the
king's, and the noble answered, <q>I perceived by all your
answers that you were no peasant. And now you deserve
to die, because all my brothers and relations were killed
in that fight; yet I will not put you to death, that I may
not break my promise.</q>
</p>

<p>
As soon, therefore, as he was recovered, he sold him to
a certain Frisian at London, but he could not in any wise
be bound either by him, or as he was being led thither.
But when his enemies had put all manner of bonds on
him, and the buyer perceived that he could in no way be
bound, he gave him leave to ransom himself if he could.
Now it was at the third hour, when the Masses were
wont to be said, that his bonds were most frequently
loosed. He, having taken an oath that he would either
return, or send his owner the money for the ransom,
went into Kent to King Hlothere, who was son to the
sister of Queen Ethelthryth,<note place='foot'>Sexburg. Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VIII'>III, 8</ref>; IV, 19, p. <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>, and note.</note> above spoken of, for he
had once been that queen's thegn. From him he asked
and obtained the price of his freedom, and as he had
promised, sent it to his master for his ransom.
</p>

<p>
Returning afterwards into his own country, and coming
to his brother, he gave him an exact account of all his
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
misfortunes, and the consolation afforded to him in
them; and from what his brother told him he understood,
that his bonds had been generally loosed at those
times when Masses had been celebrated for him; and he
perceived that other advantages and blessings which
had fallen to his lot in his time of danger, had been conferred
on him from Heaven, through the intercession of
his brother, and the Oblation of the saving Sacrifice.
Many, on hearing this account from the aforesaid man,
were stirred up in faith and pious devotion to prayer, or
to alms-giving, or to make an offering to God of the
Sacrifice of the holy Oblation, for the deliverance of their
friends who had departed this world; for they knew that
such saving Sacrifice availed for the eternal redemption
both of body and soul. This story was also told me by
some of those who had heard it related by the man himself
to whom it happened; therefore, since I had a clear
understanding of it, I have not hesitated to insert it in
my Ecclesiastical History.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_XXIII'/>
<head>Chap. XXIII. Of the life and death of the Abbess Hilda.
[614-680 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the year after this, that is the year of our Lord 680,
the most religious handmaid of Christ, Hilda,<note place='foot'>Cf. III, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXV'>25</ref>; <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIV'>IV, 24</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>V, 24</ref>.</note> abbess of
the monastery that is called Streanaeshalch,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note> as we mentioned
above, after having done many heavenly deeds on
earth, passed thence to receive the rewards of the
heavenly life, on the 17th of November, at the age of
sixty-six years. Her life falls into two equal parts, for
the first thirty-three years of it she spent living most
nobly in the secular habit; and still more nobly dedicated
the remaining half to the Lord in the monastic life. For
she was nobly born, being the daughter of Hereric,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>, this Chapter. He was the son of Edwin's elder
brother, who died in exile after the invasion of Deira by Ethelric,
king of Bernicia, in 589.</note>
nephew to King Edwin, and with that king she also received
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
the faith and mysteries of Christ, at the preaching
of Paulinus, of blessed memory,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_II_Chap_IX'>II, 9</ref>, foll.</note> the first bishop of the
Northumbrians, and preserved the same undefiled till
she attained to the vision of our Lord in Heaven.
</p>

<p>
When she had resolved to quit the secular habit, and
to serve Him alone, she withdrew into the province of
the East Angles, for she was allied to the king there;<note place='foot'>Her sister, Heresuid, had married Ethelhere, brother of Anna,
of East Anglia, whom he succeeded. In 647, when Hilda took the
veil, Anna was still king.</note>
being desirous to cross over thence into Gaul, forsaking
her native country and all that she had, and so to live a
stranger for our Lord's sake in the monastery of Cale,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_III_Chap_VIII'>III, 8</ref>, note.</note>
that she might the better attain to the eternal country
in heaven. For her sister Heresuid, mother to Aldwulf,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XV'>II, 15</ref>; <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVII'>IV, 17</ref>.</note>
king of the East Angles, was at that time living in the
same monastery, under regular discipline, waiting for
an everlasting crown; and led by her example, she continued
a whole year in the aforesaid province, with the
design of going abroad; but afterwards, Bishop Aidan
recalled her to her home, and she received land to the
extent of one family on the north side of the river
Wear;<note place='foot'>A small cell, not otherwise known.</note> where likewise for a year she led a monastic
life, with very few companions.
</p>

<p>
After this she was made abbess in the monastery
called Heruteu,<note place='foot'>Hartlepool, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> III, 24, p. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, note.</note> which monastery had been founded, not
long before, by the pious handmaid of Christ, Heiu,<note place='foot'>Bede is the sole authority for her life. A fifteenth century gloss
on one of the MSS. has led to her being wrongly identified with
the Irish Bega, the supposed foundress of St. Bees.</note>
who is said to have been the first woman in the province
of the Northumbrians who took upon her the vows and
habit of a nun, being consecrated by Bishop Aidan; but
she, soon after she had founded that monastery, retired
to the city of Calcaria,<note place='foot'>A Roman station on the Wharfe, now Tadcaster. Probably
the nunnery was at Healaugh (Heiu's <foreign rend='italic'>laeg</foreign> = territory), three miles
north of Calcaria. A gravestone bearing Heiu's name has been
found there.</note> which is called Kaelcacaestir
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
by the English, and there fixed her dwelling. Hilda,
the handmaid of Christ, being set over that monastery,
began immediately to order it in all things under a rule
of life, according as she had been instructed by learned
men; for Bishop Aidan, and others of the religious that
knew her, frequently visited her and loved her heartily,
and diligently instructed her, because of her innate
wisdom and love of the service of God.
</p>

<p>
When she had for some years governed this monastery,
wholly intent upon establishing a rule of life, it
happened that she also undertook either to build or to
set in order a monastery in the place called Streanaeshalch,
and this work which was laid upon her she industriously
performed; for she put this monastery under
the same rule of monastic life as the former; and taught
there the strict observance of justice, piety, chastity, and
other virtues, and particularly of peace and charity; so
that, after the example of the primitive Church, no one there
was rich, and none poor, for they had all things common,
and none had any private property. Her prudence was
so great, that not only meaner men in their need, but
sometimes even kings and princes, sought and received
her counsel; she obliged those who were under her
direction to give so much time to reading of the Holy
Scriptures, and to exercise themselves so much in works
of justice, that many might readily be found there fit for
the priesthood and the service of the altar.
</p>

<p>
Indeed we have seen five from that monastery who
afterwards became bishops, and all of them men of singular
merit and sanctity, whose names were Bosa,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>12</ref>.</note> Aetla,<note place='foot'>His name does not appear in any of the lists of bishops. There
is no evidence that a see of Dorchester (cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>III, 7</ref>, and note) existed
at this time, except from this passage and the statement of
Florence of Worcester to the effect that a fivefold division of the
Mercian diocese took place in 679, that Dorchester was included
in Mercia, and that Aetla was appointed as its bishop. Probably
this latter statement is derived from Bede. It has been proposed
to identify Aetla with Haedde, Bishop of the West Saxons (<ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>III, 7</ref>;
<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>IV, 12</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>V, 18</ref>), but it seems unlikely that Bede should not have
mentioned their identity. The most probable explanation seems to
be that a see was established about 679 at Dorchester (which may
have been under Mercia at the time) and that Aetla was its bishop,
but that it had only a very short existence.</note>
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
Oftfor,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>, notes.</note> John,<note place='foot'>John of Beverley, <q>Inderauuda</q> (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_V_Chap_II'>V, 2</ref>). He and Berthun
(<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>) are said to have founded Beverley. He was consecrated
Bishop of Hexham, probably in 687, transferred to York 705, when
Wilfrid was restored to Hexham, and died in 721, soon after his
retirement to Beverley (<ref target='Book_V_Chap_VI'>V, 6</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>). As Bishop of Hexham he
ordained Bede both deacon and priest (<ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>V. 24</ref>). He had been a
pupil of Archbishop Theodore (cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_III'>V. 3</ref>).</note> and Wilfrid.<note place='foot'>Wilfrid II, Bishop of York. He succeeded John (<ref target='Book_V_Chap_VI'>V, 6</ref>) in 718,
and was still Bishop of York in 731 when Bede finished the History
(cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIII'>V, 23</ref>). In 732 he resigned and was succeeded by Egbert (to
whom Bede addressed the Ep. ad Egb., and who in 735 received
the pallium as Archbishop of York). Wilfrid died in 745 (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Continuation'>Continuation</ref>,
732, 735, and 745). His character is highly praised by
Alcuin (De Sanct. Ebor.).</note> Of the first we have said
above that he was consecrated bishop of York; of the
second, it may be briefly stated that he was appointed
bishop of Dorchester. Of the last two we shall tell hereafter,
that the former was ordained bishop of Hagustald,
the other of the church of York; of the third, we may
here mention that, having applied himself to the reading
and observance of the Scriptures in both the monasteries
of the Abbess Hilda,<note place='foot'>Hartlepool and Whitby, both apparently double monasteries.</note> at length being desirous to attain to
greater perfection, he went into Kent, to Archbishop
Theodore, of blessed memory; where having spent some
time in sacred studies, he resolved to go to Rome also,
which, in those days, was esteemed a very salutary
undertaking. Returning thence into Britain, he took
his way into the province of the Hwiccas,<note place='foot'>Cf. II, 2, p. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>.</note> where King
Osric then ruled,<note place='foot'>Dr. Stubbs suggests that this sub-king of the Hwiccas may
possibly be the same as Osric of Northumbria, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIII'>V, 23</ref>, and note.</note> and continued there a long time,
preaching the Word of faith, and showing an example
of good life to all that saw and heard him. At that
time, Bosel, the bishop of that province,<note place='foot'>The see was at Worcester. The foundation of the bishopric is
assigned by Florence of Worcester to the year 679, the date of the
alleged fivefold division of the Mercian diocese (<hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> p. <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, note 2),
Bosel being appointed bishop.</note> laboured under
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
such weakness of body, that he could not himself perform
episcopal functions; for which reason, Oftfor was,
by universal consent, chosen bishop in his stead, and
by order of King Ethelred,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>12</ref> and note.</note> consecrated by Bishop Wilfrid,<note place='foot'>The consecration of Oftfor is generally placed in 691. It was
after Wilfrid's second expulsion, when he was acting as Bishop of
Leicester. Theodore had died in 690, and Bertwald was not consecrated
till 693 (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_V_Chap_VIII'>V, 8</ref>).</note>
of blessed memory, who was then Bishop of the
Midland Angles, because Archbishop Theodore was dead,
and no other bishop ordained in his place. A little while
before, that is, before the election of the aforesaid man
of God, Bosel, Tatfrid,<note place='foot'>So Florence of Worcester.</note> a man of great industry and
learning, and of excellent ability, had been chosen bishop
for that province, from the monastery of the same abbess,
but had been snatched away by an untimely death, before
he could be ordained.
</p>

<p>
Thus this handmaid of Christ, the Abbess Hilda,
whom all that knew her called Mother, for her singular
piety and grace, was not only an example of good life,
to those that lived in her monastery, but afforded occasion
of amendment and salvation to many who lived at
a distance, to whom the blessed fame was brought of
her industry and virtue. For it was meet that the dream
of her mother, Bregusuid, during her infancy, should
be fulfilled. Now Bregusuid, at the time that her husband,
Hereric, lived in banishment, under Cerdic,<note place='foot'>He was king of the Britons of Loidis and Elmet. It was probably
to avenge the death of his nephew, Hereric, that Edwin conquered
Loidis and drove out Cerdic.</note> king of
the Britons, where he was also poisoned, fancied, in a
dream, that he was suddenly taken away from her and
she was seeking for him most carefully, but could find
no sign of him anywhere. After an anxious search for
him, all at once she found a most precious necklace under
her garment, and whilst she was looking on it very
attentively, it seemed to shine forth with such a blaze of
light that it filled all Britain with the glory of its brilliance.
This dream was doubtless fulfilled in her daughter that
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
we speak of, whose life was an example of the works of
light, not only blessed to herself, but to many who
desired to live aright.
</p>

<p>
When she had governed this monastery many years, it
pleased Him Who has made such merciful provision for
our salvation, to give her holy soul the trial of a long
infirmity of the flesh, to the end that, according to the
Apostle's example, her virtue might be made perfect in
weakness. Struck down with a fever, she suffered from
a burning heat, and was afflicted with the same trouble
for six years continually; during all which time she
never failed either to return thanks to her Maker, or
publicly and privately to instruct the flock committed to
her charge; for taught by her own experience she admonished
all men to serve the Lord dutifully, when health
of body is granted to them, and always to return thanks
faithfully to Him in adversity, or bodily infirmity. In
the seventh year of her sickness, when the disease
turned inwards, her last day came, and about cockcrow,
having received the voyage provision<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIV'>14</ref>, note.</note> of Holy Housel,
and called together the handmaids of Christ that were
within the same monastery, she admonished them to
preserve the peace of the Gospel among themselves, and
with all others; and even as she spoke her words of
exhortation, she joyfully saw death come, or, in the
words of our Lord, passed from death unto life.
</p>

<p>
That same night it pleased Almighty God, by a manifest
vision, to make known her death in another monastery,
at a distance from hers, which she had built that same
year, and which is called Hacanos.<note place='foot'>Hackness, thirteen miles from Whitby and three to the west of
Scarborough. It was a cell belonging to Whitby. At the dissolution
under Henry VIII, it contained only four monks, of the Benedictine
order (Dugdale, <q>Monasticon</q>).</note> There was in that
monastery, a certain nun called Begu,<note place='foot'>She has been confused with Heiu and with Bega, <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> p. <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>,
note 7.</note> who, having dedicated
her virginity to the Lord, had served Him upwards
of thirty years in the monastic life. This nun was resting
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
in the dormitory of the sisters, when on a sudden she
heard in the air the well-known sound of the bell, which
used to awake and call them to prayers, when any one
of them was taken out of this world, and opening her
eyes, as she thought, she saw the roof of the house open,
and a light shed from above filling all the place. Looking
earnestly upon that light, she saw the soul of the
aforesaid handmaid of God in that same light, being
carried to heaven attended and guided by angels. Then
awaking, and seeing the other sisters lying round about
her, she perceived that what she had seen had been
revealed to her either in a dream or a vision; and rising
immediately in great fear, she ran to the virgin who then
presided in the monastery in the place of the abbess,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, the Prioress.</note> and
whose name was Frigyth, and, with many tears and
lamentations, and heaving deep sighs, told her that the
Abbess Hilda, mother of them all, had departed this life,
and had in her sight ascended to the gates of eternal
light, and to the company of the citizens of heaven, with
a great light, and with angels for her guides. Frigyth
having heard it, awoke all the sisters, and calling them
to the church, admonished them to give themselves to
prayer and singing of psalms, for the soul of their
mother; which they did earnestly during the remainder
of the night; and at break of day, the brothers came
with news of her death, from the place where she had
died. They answered that they knew it before, and then
related in order how and when they had learnt it, by
which it appeared that her death had been revealed to
them in a vision that same hour in which the brothers
said that she had died. Thus by a fair harmony of
events Heaven ordained, that when some saw her
departure out of this world, the others should have
knowledge of her entrance into the eternal life of souls.
These monasteries are about thirteen miles distant from
each other.
</p>

<p>
It is also told, that her death was, in a vision, made
known the same night to one of the virgins dedicated to
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
God, who loved her with a great love, in the same
monastery where the said handmaid of God died. This
nun saw her soul ascend to heaven in the company of
angels; and this she openly declared, in the very same
hour that it happened, to those handmaids of Christ
that were with her; and aroused them to pray for her
soul, even before the rest of the community had heard of
her death. The truth of which was known to the whole
community in the morning. This same nun was at that
time with some other handmaids of Christ, in the remotest
part of the monastery, where the women who
had lately entered the monastic life were wont to pass
their time of probation, till they were instructed according
to rule, and admitted into the fellowship of the
community.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_XXIV'/>
<head>Chap. XXIV. That there was in her monastery a brother,
on whom the gift of song was bestowed by Heaven.<note place='foot'>Obviously ballads, probably of a warlike character, existed
before Caedmon, but he is regarded as the father of English
sacred poetry. It is a question how far the new impulse arose independently
among the Anglo-Saxons, or is to be connected with
Old Saxon religious poetry of which the <q>Heliand</q> is the only
extant specimen (cf. Plummer, <hi rend='italic'>ad loc.</hi>). Of the mass of poetry
attributed to Caedmon, much must be regarded as not his actual
work. The fragment translated here by Bede has been accepted
as genuine by most critics. It exists in the Northumbrian dialect
at the end of the Moore MS. of Bede, and in a West Saxon form
in other MSS., as well as in the Anglo-Saxon translation of Bede's
History, the Northumbrian version being the oldest.</note>
[680 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
There was in the monastery of this abbess a certain
brother, marked in a special manner by the grace of God,
for he was wont to make songs of piety and religion, so
that whatever was expounded to him out of Scripture,
he turned ere long into verse expressive of much sweetness
and penitence, in English, which was his native
language. By his songs the minds of many were often
fired with contempt of the world, and desire of the
heavenly life. Others of the English nation after him
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
attempted to compose religious poems, but none could
equal him, for he did not learn the art of poetry from
men, neither was he taught by man, but by God's grace
he received the free gift of song, for which reason he
never could compose any trivial or vain poem, but only
those which concern religion it behoved his religious
tongue to utter. For having lived in the secular habit
till he was well advanced in years, he had never learned
anything of versifying; and for this reason sometimes at
a banquet, when it was agreed to make merry by singing
in turn, if he saw the harp come towards him, he would
rise up from table and go out and return home.
</p>

<p>
Once having done so and gone out of the house where
the banquet was, to the stable, where he had to take
care of the cattle that night, he there composed himself
to rest at the proper time. Thereupon one stood by him
in his sleep, and saluting him, and calling him by his
name, said, <q>Cædmon, sing me something.</q> But he
answered, <q>I cannot sing, and for this cause I left the
banquet and retired hither, because I could not sing.</q>
Then he who talked to him replied, <q>Nevertheless thou
must needs sing to me.</q> <q>What must I sing?</q> he asked.
<q>Sing the beginning of creation,</q> said the other. Having
received this answer he straightway began to sing verses
to the praise of God the Creator, which he had never
heard, the purport whereof was after this manner: <q>Now
must we praise the Maker of the heavenly kingdom, the
power of the Creator and His counsel, the deeds of the
Father of glory. How He, being the eternal God, became
the Author of all wondrous works, Who being the Almighty
Guardian of the human race, first created heaven
for the sons of men to be the covering of their dwelling
place, and next the earth.</q> This is the sense but not the
order of the words as he sang them in his sleep; for
verses, though never so well composed, cannot be literally
translated out of one language into another without
loss of their beauty and loftiness. Awaking from his
sleep, he remembered all that he had sung in his dream,
and soon added more after the same manner, in words
which worthily expressed the praise of God.
</p>

<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>

<p>
In the morning he came to the reeve<note place='foot'><q>Villicus,</q> A.S. <q>tun-gerefa</q> = town-reeve, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, headman of
the township. Cædmon was apparently a herdsman on a farm
belonging to the monastery.</note> who was over
him, and having told him of the gift he had received,
was conducted to the abbess, and bidden, in the presence
of many learned men, to tell his dream, and repeat the
verses, that they might all examine and give their judgement
upon the nature and origin of the gift whereof he
spoke. And they all judged that heavenly grace had been
granted to him by the Lord. They expounded to him a
passage of sacred history or doctrine, enjoining upon
him, if he could, to put it into verse. Having undertaken
this task, he went away, and returning the next morning,
gave them the passage he had been bidden to translate,
rendered in most excellent verse. Whereupon the abbess,
joyfully recognizing the grace of God in the man, instructed
him to quit the secular habit, and take upon
him monastic vows; and having received him into the
monastery, she and all her people admitted him to the
company of the brethren, and ordered that he should
be taught the whole course of sacred history. So he,
giving ear to all that he could learn, and bearing it in
mind, and as it were ruminating, like a clean animal,<note place='foot'>Cf. Levit., xi, 3, and Deut., xiv, 6.</note>
turned it into most harmonious verse; and sweetly singing
it, made his masters in their turn his hearers. He
sang the creation of the world, the origin of man, and
all the history of Genesis, the departure of the children
of Israel out of Egypt, their entrance into the promised
land, and many other histories from Holy Scripture; the
Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection of our Lord, and His
Ascension into heaven; the coming of the Holy Ghost,
and the teaching of the Apostles; likewise he made many
songs concerning the terror of future judgement, the
horror of the pains of hell, and the joys of heaven; besides
many more about the blessings and the judgements
of God, by all of which he endeavoured to draw men
away from the love of sin, and to excite in them devotion
to well-doing and perseverance therein. For he was
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
a very religious man, humbly submissive to the discipline
of monastic rule, but inflamed with fervent zeal against
those who chose to do otherwise; for which reason he
made a fair ending of his life.
</p>

<p>
For when the hour of his departure drew near, it was
preceded by a bodily infirmity under which he laboured
for the space of fourteen days, yet it was of so mild a
nature that he could talk and go about the whole time.
In his neighbourhood was the house to which those that
were sick, and like to die, were wont to be carried. He
desired the person that ministered to him, as the evening
came on of the night in which he was to depart this life,
to make ready a place there for him to take his rest.
The man, wondering why he should desire it, because
there was as yet no sign of his approaching death, nevertheless
did his bidding. When they had lain down
there, and had been conversing happily and pleasantly
for some time with those that were in the house before,
and it was now past midnight, he asked them, whether
they had the Eucharist within?<note place='foot'>Apparently reserved and kept in the Infirmary for the Communion
of the dying.</note> They answered, <q>What
need of the Eucharist? for you are not yet appointed to
die, since you talk so merrily with us, as if you were in
good health.</q> <q>Nevertheless,</q> said he, <q>bring me the
Eucharist.</q> Having received It into his hand, he asked,
whether they were all in charity with him, and had no
complaint against him, nor any quarrel or grudge. They
answered, that they were all in perfect charity with him,
and free from all anger; and in their turn they asked
him to be of the same mind towards them. He answered
at once, <q>I am in charity, my children, with all the servants
of God.</q> Then strengthening himself with the
heavenly Viaticum, he prepared for the entrance into
another life, and asked how near the time was when the
brothers should be awakened to sing the nightly praises
of the Lord?<note place='foot'>Matins were sung soon after midnight.</note> They answered, <q>It is not far off.</q> Then
he said, <q>It is well, let us await that hour;</q> and signing
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
himself with the sign of the Holy Cross, he laid his head
on the pillow, and falling into a slumber for a little while,
so ended his life in silence.
</p>

<p>
Thus it came to pass, that as he had served the Lord
with a simple and pure mind, and quiet devotion, so he
now departed to behold His Presence, leaving the world
by a quiet death; and that tongue, which had uttered so
many wholesome words in praise of the Creator, spake
its last words also in His praise, while he signed himself
with the Cross, and commended his spirit into His hands;
and by what has been here said, he seems to have had
foreknowledge of his death.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_XXV'/>
<head>Chap. XXV. Of the vision that appeared to a certain
man of God before the monastery of the city Coludi was
burned down.</head>

<p>
At this time, the monastery of virgins, called the city of
Coludi,<note place='foot'>Coldingham, <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIX'>19</ref> and note.</note> above-mentioned, was burned down, through
carelessness; and yet all that knew it might have been
aware that it happened by reason of the wickedness of
those who dwelt in it, and chiefly of those who seemed
to be the greatest. But there wanted not a warning of
the approaching punishment from the Divine mercy
whereby they might have been led to amend their ways,
and by fasting and tears and prayers, like the Ninevites,
have averted the anger of the just Judge.
</p>

<p>
For there was in that monastery a man of the Scottish
race, called Adamnan,<note place='foot'>Not the Abbot of Iona who wrote the the life of St. Columba
(V, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XV'>15</ref>, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXI'>21</ref>). This Adamnan is found in the Martyrology of Wilson,
in Colgan's <q>Lives of the Irish Saints,</q> and in Bollandus, <q>Acta
Sanctorum.</q></note> leading a life entirely devoted to
God in continence and prayer, insomuch that he never
took any food or drink, except only on Sundays and
Thursdays; and often spent whole nights in watching
and prayer. This strictness in austerity of life he had
first adopted from the necessity of correcting the evil that
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
was in him; but in process of time the necessity became
a custom.
</p>

<p>
For in his youth he had been guilty of some sin for
which, when he came to himself, he conceived a great
horror, and dreaded lest he should be punished for the
same by the righteous Judge. Betaking himself, therefore,
to a priest, who, he hoped, might show him the
way of salvation, he confessed his guilt, and desired to be
advised how he might escape the wrath to come. The
priest having heard his offence, said, <q>A great wound
requires greater care in the healing thereof; wherefore
give yourself as far as you are able to fasting and psalms,
and prayer, to the end that thus coming before the presence
of the Lord in confession,</q><note place='foot'>From the Vulgate, Ps. xciv, 2. (xcv in our Psalter.)</note> you may find Him merciful.
But he, being oppressed with great grief by reason
of his guilty conscience, and desiring to be the sooner
loosed from the inward fetters of sin, which lay heavy
upon him, answered, <q>I am still young in years and
strong of body, and shall, therefore, easily bear all whatsoever
you shall enjoin me to do, if so be that I may be
saved in the day of the Lord, even though you should bid
me spend the whole night standing in prayer, and pass
the whole week in abstinence.</q> The priest replied, <q>It
is much for you to continue for a whole week without
bodily sustenance; it is enough to observe a fast for two
or three days; do this till I come again to you in a short
time, when I will more fully show you what you ought to
do, and how long to persevere in your penance.</q> Having
so said, and prescribed the measure of his penance, the
priest went away, and upon some sudden occasion passed
over into Ireland, which was his native country, and returned
no more to him, as he had appointed. But the
man remembering this injunction and his own promise,
gave himself up entirely to tears of penitence, holy vigils
and continence; so that he only took food on Thursdays
and Sundays, as has been said; and continued fasting
all the other days of the week. When he heard that his
priest had gone to Ireland, and had died there, he ever
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
after observed this manner of abstinence, which had been
appointed for him as we have said; and as he had begun
that course through the fear of God, in penitence for his
guilt, so he still continued the same unremittingly for the
love of God, and through delight in its rewards.
</p>

<p>
Having practised this carefully for a long time, it happened
that he had gone on a certain day to a distance
from the monastery, accompanied by one the brothers;
and as they were returning from this journey, when they
drew near to the monastery, and beheld its lofty buildings,
the man of God burst into tears, and his countenance
discovered the trouble of his heart. His companion,
perceiving it, asked what was the reason, to
which he answered: <q>The time is at hand when a devouring
fire shall reduce to ashes all the buildings which
you here behold, both public and private.</q> The other,
hearing these words, when they presently came into the
monastery, told them to Aebba,<note place='foot'>C. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIX'>19</ref> and note.</note> the mother of the community.
She with good cause being much troubled at
that prediction, called the man to her, and straitly questioned
him concerning the matter and how he came to
know it. He answered, <q>Being engaged one night lately
in watching and singing psalms, on a sudden I saw one
standing by me whose countenance I did not know, and I
was startled at his presence, but he bade me not to fear,
and speaking to me like a friend he said, <q>You do well
in that you have chosen rather at this time of rest not
to give yourself up to sleep, but to continue in watching
and prayer.</q> I answered, <q>I know I have great need to
continue in wholesome watching and earnest prayer to
the Lord to pardon my transgressions.</q> He replied,
<q>You speak truly, for you and many more have need to
redeem their sins by good works, and when they cease
from temporal labours, then to labour the more eagerly
for desire of eternal blessings; but this very few do; for
I, having now gone through all this monastery in order,
have looked into the huts<note place='foot'>The detached dwellings built round the principal buildings of
the community. Irish monasteries were built after this fashion.</note> and beds of all, and found
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
none of them except yourself busy about the health of
his soul; but all of them, both men and women, are
either sunk in slothful sleep, or are awake in order to
commit sin; for even the cells that were built for prayer
or reading, are now converted into places of feasting,
drinking, talking, and other delights; the very virgins
dedicated to God, laying aside the respect due to their profession,
whensoever they are at leisure, apply themselves
to weaving fine garments, wherewith to adorn themselves
like brides, to the danger of their state, or to gain the
friendship of strange men; for which reason, as is meet,
a heavy judgement from Heaven with raging fire is
ready to fall on this place and those that dwell therein.</q></q>
The abbess said, <q>Why did you not sooner reveal to
me what you knew?</q> He answered, <q>I was afraid to
do it, out of respect to you, lest you should be too much
afflicted; yet you may have this comfort, that the blow
will not fall in your days.</q> This vision being made
known, the inhabitants of that place were for a few days
in some little fear, and leaving off their sins, began to
do penance; but after the death of the abbess they returned
to their former defilement, nay, they committed
worse sins; and when they said <q>Peace and safety,</q>
the doom of the aforesaid judgement came suddenly
upon them.
</p>

<p>
That all this fell out after this manner, was told me
by my most reverend fellow-priest, Aedgils, who then
lived in that monastery. Afterwards, when many of the
inhabitants had departed thence, on account of the destruction,
he lived a long time in our monastery,<note place='foot'>Wearmouth and Jarrow.</note> and died
there. We have thought fit to insert this in our History,
to admonish the reader of the works of the Lord, how
terrible He is in His doing toward the children of men,
lest haply we should at some time or other yield to the
snares of the flesh, and dreading too little the judgement
of God, fall under His sudden wrath, and either in His
righteous anger be brought low with temporal losses, or
else be more strictly tried and snatched away to eternal
perdition.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_XXVI'/>
<head>Chap. XXVI. Of the death of the Kings Egfrid and
Hlothere. [684-685 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 684, Egfrid, king of the Northumbrians,
sending his general, Berct,<note place='foot'>For Berct, cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>V, 24</ref> (<hi rend='italic'>sub</hi> 698), note. The circumstances which
led to the invasion are not known.</note> with an army into
Ireland, miserably laid waste that unoffending nation,
which had always been most friendly to the English; insomuch
that the invading force spared not even the
churches or monasteries. But the islanders, while to the
utmost of their power they repelled force with force, implored
the assistance of the Divine mercy, and with constant
imprecations invoked the vengeance of Heaven;
and though such as curse cannot inherit the kingdom
of God, yet it was believed, that those who were justly
cursed on account of their impiety, soon suffered the
penalty of their guilt at the avenging hand of God. For
the very next year, when that same king had rashly led
his army to ravage the province of the Picts,<note place='foot'>The Picts north of the Forth, cf. c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>12</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi> Their king at
this time was Bruide mac Bili, who was Egfrid's distant kinsman.
In 672 Egfrid had crushed a rising of Picts under the same king.</note> greatly
against the advice of his friends, and particularly of
Cuthbert,<note place='foot'>Cf. cc. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVII'>27-32</ref>. He had a mysterious intimation of the disaster
at the hour of the king's defeat and death, and warned the queen
(Eormenburg), who was with him at Carlisle (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Bede's Life of
Cuthbert, and the Anonymous Life). He is also said to have
prophesied the king's death a year before to Elfled, Egfrid's
sister (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>III, 24</ref>).</note> of blessed memory, who had been lately ordained
bishop, the enemy made a feigned retreat, and
the king was drawn into a narrow pass among remote
mountains,<note place='foot'>At Nechtansmere or Dunnechtan, identified with Dunnichen,
near Forfar. Egfrid was buried in Iona, where Adamnan, the friend
of his successor, was Abbot.</note> and slain, with the greater part of the forces
he had led thither, on the 20th of May, in the fortieth
year of his age, and the fifteenth of his reign.<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_V'>5</ref> <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi>, note. If he succeeded in February, 670, this
would be his sixteenth year.</note> His friends,
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
as has been said, advised him not to engage in this war;
but since he had the year before refused to listen to the
most reverend father, Egbert,<note place='foot'>III, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_IV'>4</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVII'>27</ref>; <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_III'>IV, 3</ref>; V, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_IX'>9</ref>, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_X'>10</ref>, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XX'>22</ref>, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>. His English birth and long
residence in Ireland fitted him to be a mediator.</note> advising him not to attack
the Scots, who were doing him no harm, it was
laid upon him as a punishment for his sin, that he should
now not listen to those who would have prevented his
death.
</p>

<p>
From that time the hopes and strength of the Anglian
kingdom <q>began to ebb and fall away;</q><note place='foot'>Vergil, Aen. II, 169.</note> for the Picts
recovered their own lands, which had been held by the
English, and so did also the Scots that were in Britain;
and some of the Britons<note place='foot'>The Dalriadic Scots (Cf. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_I'>I, 1</ref>, note; <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXXIV'>I, 34</ref>) and the Britons of
Strathclyde.</note> regained their liberty, which
they have now enjoyed for about forty-six years. Among
the many English that then either fell by the sword, or
were made slaves, or escaped by flight out of the country
of the Picts, the most reverend man of God, Trumwine,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>12</ref>.</note>
who had been made bishop over them, withdrew with
his people that were in the monastery of Aebbercurnig,<note place='foot'>Abercorn on the Forth, cf. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XII'>I, 12</ref>; <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>IV, 12</ref>, and note.</note> in
the country of the English, but close by the arm of the
sea which is the boundary between the lands of the English
and the Picts. Having commended his followers,
wheresoever he could, to his friends in the monasteries,
he chose his own place of abode in the monastery, which
we have so often mentioned, of servants and handmaids
of God, at Streanaeshalch;<note place='foot'>III, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXV'>25</ref>; <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIII'>IV, 23</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>V, 24</ref>.</note> and there for many years,
with a few of his own brethren, he led a life in all monastic
austerity, not only to his own benefit, but to the
benefit of many others, and dying there, he was buried
in the church of the blessed Peter the Apostle,<note place='foot'>Cf. III, 24, p. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>.</note> with the
honour due to his life and rank. The royal virgin, Elfled,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>III, 24</ref>, and note. Elfled succeeded Hilda as abbess, and apparently
ruled jointly with her mother.</note>
with her mother, Eanfled, whom we have mentioned before,
then presided over that monastery; but when the
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
bishop came thither, that devout teacher found in him
the greatest help in governing, and comfort in her private
life. Aldfrid<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_V'>V</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>, and Bede's two lives of Cuthbert. His mother's
name is said by the Irish authorities to have been Fina. He had
lived among the Irish islands (<q>in insulis Scottorum,</q> and <q>in
regionibus Scottorum</q>) for the sake of study, according to Bede,
but William of Malmesbury implies that Egfrid may have been responsible
for his exile. He was a man of great learning and of
scholarly tastes. In Bede's <q>History of the Abbots,</q> we are told
that he gave eight hides of land for a MS. which Benedict Biscop
had brought from Rome.</note> succeeded Egfrid in the throne, being a
man most learned in the Scriptures, said to be brother
to Egfrid, and son to King Oswy; he nobly retrieved
the ruined state of the kingdom, though within narrower
bounds.
</p>

<p>
The same year, being the 685th from the Incarnation
of our Lord, Hlothere,<note place='foot'>Cc. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_V'>5</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVII'>17</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXII'>22</ref>.</note> king of Kent, died on the 6th of
February, when he had reigned twelve years after his
brother Egbert,<note place='foot'>Cc. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_I'>1</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_V'>5</ref>.</note> who had reigned nine years: he was
wounded in battle with the South Saxons, whom Edric,<note place='foot'>Apparently at one time joint-king with Hlothere. Certain
dooms are ascribed to them both. According to Thomas of Elmham,
he was killed in war against Caedwalla, king of Wessex, and
his brother, Mul, who were at this time encroaching on Kent.</note>
the son of Egbert, had raised against him, and died
whilst his wound was being dressed. After him, this
same Edric reigned a year and a half. On his death,
kings of doubtful title, or of foreign origin,<note place='foot'>Mul seems to have usurped the throne for a time.</note> for some
time wasted the kingdom, till the lawful king, Wictred,<note place='foot'>In 692 we find him reigning as joint-king with Swaebhard (<ref target='Book_V_Chap_VIII'>V, 8</ref>
<hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>). He must have succeeded in 690, if Bede's dates are
correct; cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIII'>V, 23</ref>, where it is said that he died on April 23, 725,
after a reign of thirty-four and a half years.</note>
the son of Egbert, being settled in the throne, by his
piety and zeal delivered his nation from foreign invasion.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_XXVII'/>
<head>Chap. XXVII. How Cuthbert, a man of God, was made
bishop; and how he lived and taught whilst still in the
monastic life. [685 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the same year in which King Egfrid departed this
life,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, 685.</note> he, as has been said, caused the holy and venerable
Cuthbert<note place='foot'>C. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVI'>26</ref> and note.</note> to be ordained bishop of the church of Lindisfarne.
He had for many years led a solitary life, in
great continence of body and mind, in a very small island,
called Farne,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XVI'>III, 16</ref> and note.</note> in the ocean about nine miles distant from
that same church. From his earliest childhood<note place='foot'>As a boy he had been remarkable for his high spirits and love
of athletic exercises. The rebuke of a little boy of three is said to
have turned his thoughts to a more serious life, and a vision which
he saw as he watched his sheep on the Lammermuir Hills on the
night of Aidan's death, led him to form the resolve of entering a
monastery. (Bede's Life of Cuthbert.)</note> he had
always been inflamed with the desire of a religious life;
and he adopted the name and habit of a monk when he
was quite a young man: he first entered the monastery
of Mailros,<note place='foot'>Melrose; cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVI'>III, 26</ref> and note.</note> which is on the bank of the river Tweed,
and was then governed by the Abbot Eata,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> and <ref target='Book_V_Chap_IX'>V, 9</ref>.</note> a man of
great gentleness and simplicity, who was afterward
made bishop of the church of Hagustald or Lindisfarne,<note place='foot'>C. 12, p. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, note 1.</note>
as has been said above. The provost of the monastery
at that time was Boisil,<note place='foot'>C. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVIII'>28</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_IX'>V, 9</ref>. Probably here <q>sacerdos</q> = priest, A.S. version:
<q>masse-preost.</q> But Aelfric calls him bishop. The town of St.
Boswells on the Tweed is called after him. For an instance of his
prophetic spirit, <hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi>, c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVIII'>28</ref>. It was his fame which drew Cuthbert
to Melrose. When he saw the youth on his arrival, he exclaimed,
<q>Behold a servant of the Lord!</q> He is generally supposed
to have been carried off by the plague of 664. For an account of
his last days spent in reading the Gospel of St. John with Cuthbert,
v. Bede's Prose Life of Cuthbert. The <q>codex</q> which they used
was extant in Durham in Simeon of Durham's time.</note> a priest of great virtue and of
a prophetic spirit. Cuthbert, humbly submitting himself
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
to this man's direction, from him received both a knowledge
of the Scriptures, and an example of good works.
</p>

<p>
After he had departed to the Lord, Cuthbert became
provost of that monastery, where he instructed many in
the rule of monastic life, both by the authority of a master,
and the example of his own behaviour. Nor did he
bestow his teaching and his example in the monastic
life on his monastery alone, but laboured far and wide
to convert the people dwelling round about from the life
of foolish custom, to the love of heavenly joys; for many
profaned the faith which they held by their wicked actions;
and some also, in the time of a pestilence, neglecting
the mysteries of the faith which they had received,
had recourse to the false remedies of idolatry, as if they
could have put a stop to the plague sent from God, by
incantations, amulets, or any other secrets of the Devil's
art. In order to correct the error of both sorts, he often
went forth from the monastery, sometimes on horseback,
but oftener on foot, and went to the neighbouring townships,
where he preached the way of truth to such as had
gone astray; which Boisil also in his time had been wont
to do. It was then the custom of the English people,
that when a clerk or priest came to a township, they all,
at his summons, flocked together to hear the Word;
willingly heard what was said, and still more willingly
practised those things that they could hear and understand.
And such was Cuthbert's skill in speaking, so
keen his desire to persuade men of what he taught, such
a light shone in his angelic face, that no man present
dared to conceal from him the secrets of his heart, but all
openly revealed in confession what they had done, thinking
doubtless that their guilt could in nowise be hidden
from him; and having confessed their sins, they wiped
them out by fruits worthy of repentance, as he bade them.
He was wont chiefly to resort to those places and preach
in those villages which were situated afar off amid steep
and wild mountains, so that others dreaded to go thither,
and whereof the poverty and barbarity rendered them inaccessible
to other teachers. But he, devoting himself
entirely to that pious labour, so industriously ministered
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
to them with his wise teaching, that when he went forth
from the monastery, he would often stay a whole week,
sometimes two or three, or even sometimes a full month,
before he returned home, continuing among the hill folk to
call that simple people by his preaching and good works
to the things of Heaven.
</p>

<p>
This venerable servant of the Lord, having thus spent
many years in the monastery of Mailros, and there become
conspicuous by great tokens of virtue, his most
reverend abbot, Eata, removed him to the isle of Lindisfarne,
that he might there also, by his authority as provost
and by the example of his own practice, instruct
the brethren in the observance of regular discipline; for
the same reverend father then governed that place also
as abbot. From ancient times, the bishop was wont
to reside there with his clergy, and the abbot with his
monks, who were likewise under the paternal care of the
bishop; because Aidan, who was the first bishop of the
place, being himself a monk, brought monks thither,
and settled the monastic institution there;<note place='foot'>Cf. III, 3, p. <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, note 3.</note> as the blessed
Father Augustine is known to have done before in Kent,
when the most reverend Pope Gregory wrote to him, as
has been said above, to this effect: <q>But in that you, my
brother, having been instructed in monastic rules, must
not live apart from your clergy in the Church of the English,
which has been lately, by the will of God, converted
to the faith, you must establish the manner of
conversation of our fathers in the primitive Church,
among whom, none said that aught of the things which
they possessed was his own; but they had all things
common.</q><note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXVII'>I, 27</ref> <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_XXVIII'/>
<head>Chap. XXVIII. How the same St. Cuthbert, living the
life of an Anchorite, by his prayers obtained a spring in
a dry soil, and had a crop from seed sown by the labour
of his hands out of season. [676 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
After this, Cuthbert, as he grew in goodness and intensity
of devotion, attained also to a hermit's life of
contemplation in silence and solitude, as we have mentioned.
But forasmuch as many years ago we wrote
enough concerning his life and virtues, both in heroic
verse and prose,<note place='foot'>Much of the account given here is from the prose life.</note> it may suffice at present only to mention
this, that when he was about to go to the island, he
declared to the brothers, <q>If by the grace of God it shall
be granted to me, that I may live in that place by the
labour of my hands, I will willingly abide there; but if
not, God willing, I will very soon return to you.</q> The
place was quite destitute of water, corn, and trees; and
being infested by evil spirits, was very ill suited for human
habitation; but it became in all respects habitable, at
the desire of the man of God; for at his coming the
wicked spirits departed. When, after expelling the
enemy, he had, with the help of the brethren, built
himself a narrow dwelling, with a mound about it, and
the necessary cells in it, to wit, an oratory and a common
living room, he ordered the brothers to dig a pit in the
floor of the room, although the ground was hard and
stony, and no hopes appeared of any spring. When they
had done this relying upon the faith and prayers of the
servant of God, the next day it was found to be full of
water, and to this day affords abundance of its heavenly
bounty to all that resort thither. He also desired that
instruments for husbandry might be brought him, and
some wheat; but having prepared the ground and sown
the wheat at the proper season, no sign of a blade, not
to speak of ears, had sprouted from it by the summer.
Hereupon, when the brethren visited him according to
custom, he ordered barley to be brought him, if haply it
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
were either the nature of the soil, or the will of God, the
Giver of all things, that such grain rather should grow
there. He sowed it in the same field, when it was brought
him, after the proper time of sowing, and therefore without
any likelihood of its bearing fruit; but a plentiful crop
immediately sprang up, and afforded the man of God
the means which he had desired of supporting himself
by his own labour.
</p>

<p>
When he had here served God in solitude many years,
the mound which encompassed his dwelling being so
high, that he could see nothing from it but heaven,
which he thirsted to enter, it happened that a great synod
was assembled in the presence of King Egfrid, near the
river Alne, at a place called Adtuifyrdi,<note place='foot'>The synod of Twyford, a mixed assembly of clergy and laity,
met in the autumn of 684. The place is <q>perhaps where the Aln
is crossed by two fords near Whittingham</q> (in Northumberland)
(Bright). This is another instance of the preposition prefixed to
the name, cf. II, 14, p. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, note 5.</note> which signifies
<q>at the two fords,</q> in which Archbishop Theodore, of
blessed memory, presided, and there Cuthbert was, with
one mind and consent of all, chosen bishop of the church
of Lindisfarne. They could not, however, draw him from
his hermitage, though many messengers and letters were
sent to him. At last the aforesaid king himself, with the
most holy Bishop Trumwine,<note place='foot'>Cc. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>12</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVI'>26</ref>.</note> and other religious and
powerful men, sailed to the island; many also of the
brothers from the isle of Lindisfarne itself, assembled
together for the same purpose: they all knelt, and conjured
him by the Lord, with tears and entreaties, till
they drew him, also in tears, from his beloved retreat,
and forced him to go to the synod. When he arrived
there, he was very reluctantly overcome by the unanimous
resolution of all present, and compelled to take upon himself
the duties of the episcopate; being chiefly prevailed
upon by the words of Boisil, the servant of God, who,
when he had prophetically<note place='foot'>Cf. c. 27, p. <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>.</note> foretold all things that were
to befall him, had also predicted that he should be a
bishop. Nevertheless, the consecration was not appointed
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
immediately; but when the winter, which was then at
hand, was over, it was carried out at Easter,<note place='foot'>In 685.</note> in the city
of York, and in the presence of the aforesaid King Egfrid;
seven bishops coming together for his consecration,
among whom, Theodore, of blessed memory, was Primate.
He was first elected bishop of the church of Hagustald,
in the place of Tunbert,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>12</ref> and note.</note> who had been deposed from the
episcopate; but because he chose rather to be placed
over the church of Lindisfarne, in which he had lived, it
was thought fit that Eata should return to the see of the
church of Hagustald, to which he had been first ordained,
and that Cuthbert should take upon him the government
of the church of Lindisfarne.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Following the example of the blessed Apostles, he
adorned the episcopal dignity by his virtuous deeds; for
he both protected the people committed to his charge
by constant prayer, and roused them, by wholesome admonitions,
to thoughts of Heaven. He first showed in
his own life what he taught others to do, a practice which
greatly strengthens all teaching; for he was above all
things inflamed with the fire of Divine charity, of sober
mind and patient, most diligently intent on devout prayers,
and kindly to all that came to him for comfort. He
thought it stood in the stead of prayer to afford the weak
brethren the help of his exhortation, knowing that he
who said <q>Thou shalt love the Lord thy God,</q> said likewise,
<q>Thou shalt love thy neighbour.</q> He was noted
for penitential abstinence, and was always through the
grace of compunction, intent upon heavenly things. And
when he offered up to God the Sacrifice of the saving
Victim, he commended his prayer to the Lord, not with
uplifted voice, but with tears drawn from the bottom of
his heart.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_XXIX'/>
<head>Chap. XXIX. How this bishop foretold that his own
death was at hand to the anchorite Herebert. [687 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Having spent two years in his bishopric, he returned to
his island and hermitage,<note place='foot'>Soon after Christmas, 686. In February, 687, his last illness
began.</note> being warned of God that the
day of his death, or rather of his entrance into that life
which alone can be called life, was drawing near; as he,
at that time, with his wonted candour, signified to certain
persons, though in words which were somewhat
obscure, but which were nevertheless afterwards plainly
understood; while to others he declared the same openly.
</p>

<p>
There was a certain priest, called Herebert, a man of
holy life, who had long been united with the man of
God, Cuthbert, in the bonds of spiritual friendship. This
man leading a solitary life in the island of that great
lake from which the river Derwent flows at its beginning,<note place='foot'>St. Herbert's Island in Derwentwater. Strictly speaking, the
Derwent flows through Derwentwater: it rises in Borrowdale.
An indulgence of forty days was granted by Thomas Appleby,
Bishop of Carlisle, in 1374 to pilgrims who visited the island.</note>
was wont to visit him every year, and to receive from
him the teaching of everlasting salvation. Hearing that
Bishop Cuthbert was come to the city of Lugubalia,<note place='foot'>Carlisle, called also Luel by Simeon of Durham.</note> he
went thither to him, according to his custom, seeking
to be more and more inflamed in heavenly desires
through his wholesome admonitions. Whilst they alternately
entertained one another with draughts of the
celestial life, the bishop, among other things, said, <q>Brother
Herebert, remember at this time to ask me and
speak to me concerning all whereof you have need to
ask and speak; for, when we part, we shall never again
see one another with bodily eyesight in this world. For
I know of a surety that the time of my departure is at
hand, and that shortly I must put off this my tabernacle.</q>
Hearing these words, Herebert fell down at his feet, with
tears and lamentations, and said, <q>I beseech you, by
the Lord, not to forsake me; but to remember your most
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
faithful companion, and entreat the mercy of God that,
as we have served Him together upon earth, so we may
depart together to behold His grace in Heaven. For you
know that I have always endeavoured to live according
to the words of your lips, and likewise whatsoever faults
I have committed, either through ignorance or frailty, I
have instantly sought to amend according to the judgement
of your will.</q> The bishop applied himself to prayer,
and having presently had intimation in the spirit that he
had obtained what he asked of the Lord, he said, <q>Rise,
brother, and do not weep, but rejoice greatly because
the mercy of Heaven has granted what we desired.</q>
</p>

<p>
The event established the truth of this promise and
prophecy, for after their parting, they never again saw
one another in the flesh; but their spirits quitting their
bodies on one and the same day, to wit, the 20th of
March,<note place='foot'>In 687.</note> were immediately united in fellowship in the
blessed vision, and together translated to the heavenly
kingdom by the ministry of angels. But Herebert was
first wasted by a long-continued infirmity, through the
dispensation of the Lord's mercy, as may be believed, to
the end that if he was in any wise inferior in merit to the
blessed Cuthbert, that which was lacking might be supplied
by the chastening pain of a long sickness, that
being thus made equal in grace to his intercessor, as he
departed out of the body at one and the same time with
him, so he might be accounted worthy to be received
into the like abode of eternal bliss.
</p>

<p>
The most reverend father died in the isle of Farne,
earnestly entreating the brothers that he might also be
buried there, where he had served no small time under
the Lord's banner. But at length yielding to their entreaties,
he consented to be carried back to the isle of
Lindisfarne, and there buried in the church.<note place='foot'>In St. Peter's Church. In 875, when the monks fled from
Lindisfarne before the Danes, his relics were removed, first to
Chester-le-Street, then to Ripon, and eventually to Durham.
Simeon of Durham says the body was found to be uncorrupted,
when it was placed in the new Cathedral there in 1104.</note> This being
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
done, the venerable Bishop Wilfrid held the episcopal
see of that church one year,<note place='foot'>The year in which he administered the bishopric falls between
his restoration to York, Hexham, and the monastery of Ripon,
and his second expulsion.</note> till such time as a bishop
should be chosen to be ordained in the room of Cuthbert.
Afterwards Eadbert<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXV'>III, 25</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXX'>30</ref>. In the life of Cuthbert he is
described as a man <q>magnarum virtutum</q> (miraculous powers?).
Alcuin tells that he calmed the winds by his prayers.</note> was ordained, a man renowned for
his knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, as also for his
observance of the heavenly precepts, and chiefly for
almsgiving, so that, according to the law, he gave every
year the tenth part, not only of four-footed beasts, but
also of all corn and fruit, as also of his garments, to the
poor.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_IV_Chap_XXX'/>
<head>Chap. XXX. How his body was found altogether uncorrupted
after it had been buried eleven years; and
how his successor in the bishopric departed this world
not long after. [698 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In order to show forth the great glory of the life after
death of the man of God, Cuthbert, whereas the loftiness
of his life before his death had been revealed by the
testimony of many miracles, when he had been buried
eleven years, Divine Providence put it into the minds of
the brethren to take up his bones. They thought to find
them dry and all the rest of the body consumed and
turned to dust, after the manner of the dead, and they
desired to put them into a new coffin, and to lay them in
the same place, but above the pavement, for the honour
due to him. They made known their resolve to Bishop
Eadbert, and he consented to it, and bade them to be
mindful to do it on the anniversary of his burial. They
did so, and opening the grave, found all the body whole,
as if he were still alive, and the joints of the limbs
pliable, like one asleep rather than dead; besides, all
the vestments in which he was clothed were not only undefiled,
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
but marvellous to behold, being fresh and bright
as at the first. The brothers seeing this, were struck
with a great dread, and hastened to tell the bishop what
they had found; he being then alone in a place remote
from the church, and encompassed on all sides by the
shifting waves of the sea. There he always used to
spend the time of Lent, and was wont to pass the forty
days before the Nativity of our Lord, in great devotion
with abstinence and prayer and tears. There also his
venerable predecessor, Cuthbert, had for some time
served as the soldier of the Lord in solitude before he
went to the isle of Farne.
</p>

<p>
They brought him also some part of the garments
that had covered the holy body; which presents he
thankfully accepted, and gladly heard of the miracles,
and he kissed the garments even, with great affection,
as if they had been still upon his father's body, and
said, <q>Let new garments be put upon the body, in place
of these you have brought, and so lay it in the coffin
which you have prepared; for I know of a surety that
the place will not long remain empty, which has been
hallowed with so great grace of heavenly miracles; and
how happy is he to whom the Lord, the Author and
Giver of all bliss, shall vouchsafe to grant the privilege
of resting therein.</q> When the bishop had made an end
of saying this and more in like manner, with many tears
and great compunction and with faltering tongue, the
brothers did as he had commanded them, and when they
had wrapped the body in new garments, and laid it in a
new coffin, they placed it above the pavement of the
sanctuary. Soon after, Bishop Eadbert, beloved of God,
fell grievously sick, and his fever daily increasing in
severity, ere long, that is, on the 6th of May,<note place='foot'>698 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> he also
departed to the Lord, and they laid his body in the grave
of the blessed father Cuthbert, placing over it the coffin,
with the uncorrupted remains of that father. The
miracles of healing, sometimes wrought in that place
testify to the merits of them both; of some of these we
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
have before preserved the memory in the book of his
life. But in this History we have thought fit to add some
others which have lately come to our knowledge.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. XXXI. Of one that was cured of a palsy at his
tomb.</head>

<p>
There was in that same monastery a brother whose name
was Badudegn, who had for no small time ministered
to the guests of the house, and is still living, having the
testimony of all the brothers and strangers resorting
thither, of being a man of much piety and religion, and
serving the office put upon him only for the sake of the
heavenly reward. This man, having one day washed in
the sea the coverings or blankets which he used in the
guest chamber, was returning home, when on the way,
he was seized with a sudden infirmity, insomuch that he
fell to the ground, and lay there a long time and could
scarce at last rise again. When he got up, he felt one
half of his body, from the head to the foot, struck with
palsy, and with great trouble made his way home by the
help of a staff. The disease increased by degrees, and
as night approached, became still worse, so that when
day returned, he could scarcely rise or walk alone. Suffering
from this trouble, he conceived the wise resolve to
go to the church, as best he could, and approach the
tomb of the reverend father Cuthbert, and there, on his
knees, humbly beseech the mercy of God that he might
either be delivered from that disease, if it were well for
him, or if by the grace of God it was ordained for him to
be chastened longer by this affliction, that he might bear
the pain which was laid upon him with patience and a
quiet mind.
</p>

<p>
He did accordingly as he had determined, and supporting
his weak limbs with a staff, entered the church.
There prostrating himself before the body of the man
of God, he prayed with pious earnestness, that, through
his intercession, the Lord might be propitious to him.
As he prayed, he seemed to fall into a deep sleep, and,
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
as he was afterwards wont to relate, felt a large and
broad hand touch his head, where the pain lay, and likewise
pass over all that part of his body which had been
benumbed by the disease, down to his feet. Gradually
the pain departed and health returned. Then he awoke,
and rose up in perfect health, and returning thanks to
the Lord for his recovery, told the brothers what had
been done for him; and to the joy of them all, returned
the more zealously, as if chastened by the trial of his
affliction, to the service which he was wont before to
perform with care.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, the very garments which had been on
Cuthbert's body, dedicated to God, either while he was
alive, or after his death, were not without the virtue of
healing, as may be seen in the book of his life and
miracles, by such as shall read it.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. XXXII. Of one who was lately cured of a disease
in his eye at the relics of St. Cuthbert.</head>

<p>
Nor is that cure to be passed over in silence, which was
performed by his relics three years ago, and was told me
lately by the brother himself, on whom it was wrought.
It happened in the monastery, which, being built near
the river Dacore,<note place='foot'>The Dacre, a small stream near Penrith. There are the ruins
of a castle, and Smith says there is a tradition of a monastery on
its banks.</note> has taken its name from the same,
over which, at that time, the religious Suidbert<note place='foot'>Not the missionary in <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XI'>V, 11</ref>.</note> presided
as abbot. In that monastery was a youth whose eyelid
was disfigured by an unsightly tumour, which growing
daily greater, threatened the loss of the eye. The physicians
endeavoured to mitigate it by applying ointments,
but in vain. Some said it ought to be cut off; others
opposed this course, for fear of greater danger. The
brother having long laboured under this malady, when
no human means availed to save his eye, but rather, it
grew daily worse, on a sudden, through the grace of the
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
mercy of God, it came to pass that he was cured by the
relics of the holy father, Cuthbert. For when the brethren
found his body uncorrupted, after having been many
years buried, they took some part of the hair, to give, as
relics, to friends who asked for them, or to show, in
testimony of the miracle.
</p>

<p>
One of the priests of the monastery, named Thruidred,
who is now abbot there, had a small part of these relics
by him at that time. One day he went into the church
and opened the box of relics, to give some part of them
to a friend who asked for it, and it happened that the
youth who had the diseased eye was then in the church.
The priest, having given his friend as much as he thought
fit, gave the rest to the youth to put back into its
place. But he having received the hairs of the holy
head, prompted by some salutary impulse, applied them
to the diseased eyelid, and endeavoured for some time,
by the application of them, to abate and mitigate the
tumour. Having done this, he again laid the relics in
the box, as he had been bidden, believing that his eye
would soon be cured by the hairs of the man of God,
which had touched it; nor did his faith disappoint him.
It was then, as he is wont to relate, about the second
hour of the day; but while he was occupied with other
thoughts and business of the day, on a sudden, about
the sixth hour of the same, touching his eye, he found it
and the eyelid as sound as if there never had been any
disfigurement or tumour on it.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_V'/>
<head>Book V</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_V_Chap_I'/>
<head>Chap. I. How Ethelwald, successor to Cuthbert, leading
a hermit's life, calmed a tempest by his prayers when
the brethren were in danger at sea. [687-699 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
The venerable Ethelwald<note place='foot'><q>Innumera miracula</q> are ascribed to him by Florence of
Worcester.</note> succeeded the man of God,
Cuthbert, in the exercise of a solitary life, which he
spent in the isle of Farne<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_III_Chap_XVI'>III, 16</ref>, and note; <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVII'>IV, 27-30</ref>.</note> before he became a bishop.
After he had received the priesthood, he consecrated his
office by deeds worthy of that degree for many years in
the monastery which is called Inhrypum.<note place='foot'>Ripon, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> III, 25, p. <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>V, 19</ref>.</note> To the end
that his merit and manner of life may be the more certainly
made known, I will relate one miracle of his,
which was told me by one of the brothers for and on
whom the same was wrought; to wit, Guthfrid, the
venerable servant and priest of Christ, who also, afterwards,
as abbot, presided over the brethren of the same
church of Lindisfarne, in which he was educated.
</p>

<p>
<q>I came,</q> says he, <q>to the island of Farne, with two
others of the brethren, desiring to speak with the most
reverend father, Ethelwald. Having been refreshed with
his discourse, and asked for his blessing, as we were
returning home, behold on a sudden, when we were in
the midst of the sea, the fair weather in which we were
sailing, was broken, and there arose so great and terrible
a tempest, that neither sails nor oars were of any use to
us, nor had we anything to expect but death. After long
struggling with the wind and waves to no effect, at last
we looked back to see whether it was possible by any
means at least to return to the island whence we came,
but we found that we were on all sides alike cut off by the
storm, and that there was no hope of escape by our own
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
efforts. But looking further, we perceived, on the island
of Farne, our father Ethelwald, beloved of God, come out
of his retreat to watch our course; for, hearing the noise
of the tempest and raging sea, he had come forth to see
what would become of us. When he beheld us in distress
and despair, he bowed his knees to the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, in prayer for our life and safety; and
as he finished his prayer, he calmed the swelling water, in
such sort that the fierceness of the storm ceased on all
sides, and fair winds attended us over a smooth sea to
the very shore. When we had landed, and had pulled up
our small vessel from the waves, the storm, which had
ceased a short time for our sake, presently returned,
and raged furiously during the whole day; so that it
plainly appeared that the brief interval of calm had been
granted by Heaven in answer to the prayers of the man
of God, to the end that we might escape.</q>
</p>

<p>
The man of God remained in the isle of Farne twelve
years, and died there; but was buried in the church of
the blessed Apostle Peter, in the isle of Lindisfarne, beside
the bodies of the aforesaid bishops.<note place='foot'>Cuthbert and Eadbert (IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIX'>29</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXX'>30</ref>). His relics were removed
with Cuthbert's and finally interred at Durham.</note> These things happened
in the days of King Aldfrid,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVI'>IV, 26</ref>, and <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>V, 18</ref>. He reigned from 685 to 705.</note> who, after his brother
Egfrid, ruled the nation of the Northumbrians for nineteen
years.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_V_Chap_II'/>
<head>Chap. II. How Bishop John cured a dumb man by his
blessing. [687 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the beginning of Aldfrid's reign, Bishop Eata<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVI'>III, 26</ref>; IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>12</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVII'>27</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVIII'>28</ref>. He died in 686.</note> died,
and was succeeded in the bishopric of the church of
Hagustald by the holy man John,<note place='foot'>John of Beverley, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> IV, 23, p. <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, and note. Wilfrid administered
the bishopric during the vacancy between Eata's death
and John's consecration in 687.</note> of whom those that
knew him well are wont to tell many miracles, and more
particularly Berthun,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi></note> a man worthy of all reverence and
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
of undoubted truthfulness, and once his deacon, now
abbot of the monastery called Inderauuda,<note place='foot'>Beverley. The present name is said to be derived from a
colony of beavers in the Hull river. In 866 the minster was destroyed
by the Danes, but it was repaired three years later. In
925 Athelstan restored it and made it collegiate, giving it lands
and various privileges. (For the preposition, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> II, 14, p. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, note 5.)</note> that is, <q>In
the wood of the Deiri</q>: some of which miracles we
have thought fit to hand on to posterity. There is a
certain remote dwelling<note place='foot'>Supposed to have been at St. John's Lee, near Hexham. The
old name is Erneshow or Herneshaw. (Richard of Hexham,
Folcard.)</note> enclosed by a mound, among
scattered trees, not far from the church of Hagustald,
being about a mile and a half distant and separated from
it by the river Tyne, having an oratory<note place='foot'>The reading of the best MSS., <q>Clymeterium</q> (<hi rend='italic'>v. ll.</hi> clymiterium,
climiterium, clymitorium) seems inexplicable. Smith reads
<q>coemeterium,</q> probably on the authority of a gloss (<q>id est
cimeterium</q>) on some of the later MSS., and it has generally been
translated <q>cemetery.</q> The AS. version has <q>gebæd hus 7 ciricean</q> = oratory
and church.</note> dedicated to St.
Michael the Archangel, where the man of God used
frequently, as occasion offered, and specially in Lent, to
abide with a few companions and in quiet give himself
to prayer and study. Having come hither once at the
beginning of Lent to stay, he bade his followers find
out some poor man labouring under any grievous infirmity,
or want, whom they might keep with them
during those days, to receive alms, for so he was always
used to do.
</p>

<p>
There was in a township not far off, a certain youth
who was dumb, known to the bishop, for he often used
to come into his presence to receive alms. He had never
been able to speak one word; besides, he had so much
scurf and scab on his head, that no hair could ever grow
on the top of it, but only some rough hairs stood on end
round about it. The bishop caused this young man to
be brought, and a little hut to be made for him within
the enclosure of the dwelling, in which he might abide,
and receive alms from him every day. When one week
of Lent was over, the next Sunday he bade the poor
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
man come to him, and when he had come, he bade
him put his tongue out of his mouth and show it him;
then taking him by the chin, he made the sign of the
Holy Cross on his tongue, directing him to draw it back
so signed into his mouth and to speak. <q>Pronounce
some word,</q> said he; <q>say <q>gae,</q></q> which, in the language
of the English, is the word of affirming and consenting,
that is, yes. The youth's tongue was immediately
loosed, and he spoke as he was bidden. The
bishop then added the names of the letters: <q>Say A.</q>
He said A. <q>Say B;</q> he said B also. When he had
repeated all the letters after the bishop, the latter proceeded
to put syllables and words to him, and when he
had repeated them all rightly he bade him utter whole
sentences, and he did it. Nor did he cease all that day
and the next night, as long as he could keep awake,
as those who were present relate, to say something, and
to express his private thoughts and wishes to others,
which he could never do before; after the manner of the
man long lame, who, when he was healed by the Apostles
Peter and John,<note place='foot'>Acts, iii, 2-8.</note> leaping up, stood and walked, and
entered with them into the temple, walking, and leaping,
and praising the Lord, rejoicing to have the use of his
feet, which he had so long lacked. The bishop, rejoicing
with him at his cure, caused the physician to take in
hand the healing of the sores of his head. He did as he
was bidden, and with the help of the bishop's blessing
and prayers, a goodly head of hair grew as the skin was
healed. Thus the youth became fair of countenance,
ready of speech, with hair curling in comely fashion,
whereas before he had been ill-favoured, miserable, and
dumb. Thus filled with joy at his recovered health, notwithstanding
that the bishop offered to keep him in his
own household, he chose rather to return home.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_V_Chap_III'/>
<head>Chap. III. How he healed a sick maiden by his prayers.
[705 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
The same Berthun told another miracle concerning the
said bishop. When the most reverend Wilfrid, after a
long banishment, was admitted to the bishopric of the
church of Hagustald,<note place='foot'>This was Wilfrid's second restoration. He recovered Hexham
and the monastery of Ripon at the Synod on the Nidd in 705.</note> and the aforesaid John, upon the
death of Bosa,<note place='foot'>Bosa (IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>12</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>) died <hi rend='italic'>circ.</hi> 705.</note> a man of great sanctity and humility,
was, in his place, appointed bishop of York, he himself
came, once upon a time, to the monastery of nuns, at
the place called Wetadun,<note place='foot'>Watton in the East Riding of Yorkshire. (<q>Hodie Watton,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, humida villa ex aquis et paludibus quibus septa est.</q> Smith.)
It is called Betendune by Folcard, the biographer of Bishop John.</note> where the Abbess Heriburg
then presided. <q>When we were come thither,</q> said he,
<q rend='pre'>and had been received with great and universal joy,
the abbess told us, that one of the nuns, who was her
own daughter after the flesh, laboured under a grievous
sickness, for she had been lately let blood in the arm,
and whilst she was under treatment,<note place='foot'>For <q>studium</q> = medical treatment, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Plummer, <hi rend='italic'>ad loc.</hi>
Under the verb, <foreign rend='italic'>studere</foreign>, Ducange gives instances of this meaning:
<q>Iussitque rex, ut studeretur a medicis</q>; Greg. Turon., vi, 32.
<q>Episcopus, adhibito mulomedico, jussit ei (equo) studium impendere,
quo scilicet sanari potuisset</q>; St. Audoënus, lib. 2; Vit.
St. Eligii, 44.</note> was seized with an
attack of sudden pain, which speedily increased, while the
wounded arm became worse, and so much swollen, that
it could scarce be compassed with both hands; and she
lay in bed like to die through excess of pain. Wherefore
the abbess entreated the bishop that he would vouchsafe
to go in and give her his blessing; for she believed that
she would soon be better if he blessed her or laid his
hands upon her. He asked when the maiden had been
let blood, and being told that it was on the fourth day
of the moon, said, <q>You did very indiscreetly and unskilfully
to let blood on the fourth day of the moon; for I
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
remember that Archbishop Theodore,<note place='foot'>Bishop John had studied under Theodore. Cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIII'>IV, 23</ref>, note.</note> of blessed memory,
said, that blood-letting at that time was very dangerous,
when the light of the moon is waxing and the tide of the
ocean is rising. And what can I do for the maiden if she
is like to die?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But the abbess still earnestly entreated for her
daughter, whom she dearly loved, and designed to make
abbess in her stead,<note place='foot'>Note the tendency to hereditary succession in monasteries
(<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Haddan and Stubbs, III, 337-338). Instances are, however,
rare in England, though common in Ireland, where the clan
system affected ecclesiastical preferments. Eanfled and Elfled at
Whitby are not a case in point, as Eanfled did not precede her
daughter, but was only associated with her in some way in the
government of the monastery.</note> and at last prevailed with him to go
in and visit the sick maiden. Wherefore he went in,
taking me with him to the maid, who lay, as I said, in
sore anguish, and her arm swelling so greatly that it
could not be bent at all at the elbow; and he stood and
said a prayer over her, and having given his blessing,
went out. Afterwards, as we were sitting at table, at the
usual hour, some one came in and called me out, saying,
<q>Quoenburg</q> (that was the maid's name) <q>desires that you
should immediately go back to her.</q> This I did, and entering
the chamber, I found her of more cheerful countenance,
and like one in good health. And while I was
sitting beside her, she said, <q>Shall we call for something
to drink?</q>&mdash;<q>Yes,</q> said I, <q>and right glad am I, if
you can.</q> When the cup was brought, and we had both
drunk, she said, <q>As soon as the bishop had said the
prayer for me and given me his blessing and had gone
out, I immediately began to mend; and though I have
not yet recovered my former strength, yet all the pain is
quite gone both from my arm, where it was most burning,
and from all my body, as if the bishop had carried it
away with him; notwithstanding the swelling of the arm
still seems to remain.</q> But when we departed thence,
the cure of the pain in her limbs was followed by the
assuaging of the grievous swelling; and the maiden
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
being thus delivered from pains and death, returned
praise to our Lord and Saviour, in company with His
other servants who were there.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. IV. How he healed a thegn's wife that was sick,
with holy water.</head>

<p>
The same abbot related another miracle, not unlike the
former, of the aforesaid bishop. <q>Not very far from our
monastery,</q> he said, <q>to wit, about two miles off, was
the township<note place='foot'>This <q>vill</q> was at South Burton (Folcard), now called Bishop
Burton, between two and three miles from Beverley.</note> of one Puch, a thegn, whose wife had lain
sick of a very grievous disease for nearly forty days,
insomuch that for three weeks she could not be carried
out of the chamber where she lay. It happened that the
man of God was, at that time, called thither by the
thegn to consecrate a church; and when that was done,
the thegn desired him to come into his house and dine.
The bishop declined, saying that he must return to the
monastery, which was very near. The thegn, entreating
him more earnestly, vowed he would also give alms to
the poor, if so be that the bishop would vouchsafe to
enter his house that day and break his fast. I joined my
entreaties to his, promising in like manner to give alms
for the relief of the poor,<note place='foot'>To redeem his fast, as the A.S. version explains.</note> if he would but go and dine at
the thegn's house, and give his blessing. Having at
length, with much difficulty, prevailed, we went in to
refresh ourselves. The bishop had sent to the woman
that lay sick some of the holy water, which he had
blessed for the consecration of the church, by one of the
brothers who had come with me, ordering him to give
her some to drink, and wash that part of her where he
found that her pain was greatest, with some of the same
water. This being done, the woman immediately got up
whole and sound, and perceiving that she had not only
been delivered from her long sickness, but at the same
time had recovered the strength which she had lost for
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
so great a time, she presented the cup to the bishop and
to us, and continued serving us with meat and drink as
she had begun, till dinner was over; following the
example of the blessed Peter's wife's mother, who,
having been sick of a fever, arose at the touch of our
Lord's hand, and having forthwith received health and
strength, ministered to them.</q><note place='foot'>St. Matt., viii, 14-15; St. Mark, i, 30-31; St. Luke, iv, 38-39.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. V. How he likewise recalled by his prayers a
thegn's servant from death.</head>

<p>
At another time also, being called to consecrate the
church<note place='foot'>At North Burton (Dugdale, <q>Monasticon</q>).</note> of a thegn named Addi, when he had performed
the required duty, he was entreated by the thegn to go
in to one of his servants, who lay dangerously ill, insomuch
that having lost all use of his limbs, he seemed to
be at the point of death; and moreover the coffin had
been made ready wherein to bury him after his death.
The thegn urged his entreaties with tears, earnestly
beseeching him that he would go in and pray for the servant,
because his life was of great moment to him; and
he believed that if the bishop would lay his hand upon
him and give him his blessing, he would soon mend. So
the bishop went in, and saw him very near death, and
by his side the coffin in which he was to be laid for his
burial, whilst all mourned. He said a prayer and blessed
him, and going out, spake the wonted words of comfort,
<q>Good health be yours and that speedily.</q> Afterwards,
when they were sitting at table, the servant sent to his
lord, desiring that he would let him have a cup of wine,
because he was thirsty. The thegn, rejoicing greatly
that he could drink, sent him a cup of wine, blessed by
the bishop; and, as soon as he had drunk it, he immediately
got up, and, shaking off the heaviness of his
infirmity, dressed himself and went forth, and going in
to the bishop, saluted him and the other guests, saying
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
that he also would gladly eat and drink with them. They
bade him sit down with them at table, greatly rejoicing
at his recovery. He sat down, ate and drank and made
merry, and behaved himself like the rest of the company;
and living many years after, continued in the same
health which he had gained. The aforesaid abbot says
this miracle was not wrought in his presence, but that
he had it from those who were present.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_V_Chap_VI'/>
<head>Chap. VI. How, both by his prayers and blessing, he
recalled from death one of his clerks, who had bruised
himself by a fall.</head>

<p>
Nor do I think that this miracle, which Herebald,<note place='foot'>He lived till 745, according to Simeon of Durham.</note> the
servant of Christ, says was wrought upon himself by the
bishop, is to be passed over in silence. He was then one
of that bishop's clergy, but now presides as abbot in the
monastery at the mouth of the river Tyne.<note place='foot'>There were probably two monasteries at Tynemouth, the one
mentioned here, and another (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Bede's <q>Life of Cuthbert</q>),
which had been a house of monks, but afterwards, when Bede
wrote, had become a nunnery.</note> <q>Living
with him,</q> said he, <q rend='pre'>and being very well acquainted
with his course of life, I found it to be in all points
worthy of a bishop, as far as it is lawful for men to
judge; but I have known by the experience of others,
and more particularly by my own, how great his merit
was before Him Who seeth the heart; having been by
his prayer and blessing recalled from the threshold of
death and brought back to the way of life. For, when
in the prime of my youth, I lived among his clergy,
applying myself to reading and singing, but not having
yet altogether withdrawn my heart from youthful pleasures,
it happened one day that, as we were travelling
with him, we came into a plain and open road, well
fitted for galloping. The young men that were with him,
and especially the laymen, began to entreat the bishop
to give them leave to gallop, and make trial of their
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
horses one with another. He at first refused, saying
that it was an idle request; but at last, overcome by
the unanimous desire of so many, <q>Do so,</q> said he, <q>if
you will, but let Herebald have no part in the trial.</q>
Then I earnestly prayed that I might have leave to compete
with the rest, for I relied on an excellent horse,
which he had himself given me, but I could in no wise
obtain my request.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When they had several times galloped backwards
and forwards, the bishop and I looking on, my wanton
humour prevailed, and I could no longer refrain, but
though he forbade me, I struck in among them at their
sport, and began to ride with them at full speed; whereat
I heard him call after me with a groan, <q>Alas! how
much you grieve me by riding after that manner.</q>
Though I heard him, I went on against his command;
but immediately the fiery horse taking a great leap over
a hollow place in the way, I fell, and at once lost all
sense and motion, like one dying; for there was in that
place a stone, level with the ground, covered with only
a thin coating of turf, and no other stone was to be
found in all that expanse of plain; and it happened by
chance, or rather by Divine Providence so ordering it, to
punish my disobedience, that my head and my hand,
which in falling I had put under my head, struck upon
that stone, so that my thumb was broken and my skull
fractured, and I became, as I said, like one dead.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And because I could not move, they stretched a tent
there for me to lie in. It was about the seventh hour of
the day, and having lain still and as it were dead from
that time till the evening, I then revived a little, and was
carried home by my companions, and lay speechless all
the night, vomiting blood, because something was
broken within me by the fall. The bishop was very much
grieved at my fall and my misfortune, for he bore me
extraordinary affection. Nor would he stay that night,
as he was wont, among his clergy; but spent it alone in
watching and prayer, imploring the Divine goodness,
as I suppose, for my preservation. Coming to me early
in the morning, and having said a prayer over me, he
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
called me by my name, and when I awoke as it were
out of a heavy sleep, he asked whether I knew who it
was that spoke to me? I opened my eyes and said, <q>Yes;
you are my beloved bishop.</q>&mdash;<q>Can you live?</q> said he.
I answered, <q>I can, through your prayers, if the Lord
will.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He then laid his hand on my head, with the words
of blessing, and returned to prayer; when he came again
to see me, in a short time, he found me sitting and able
to talk; and, being moved by Divine inspiration, as it
soon appeared, began to ask me, whether I knew for certain
that I had been baptized? I answered that I knew
beyond all doubt that I had been washed in the font of
salvation, for the remission of sins, and I named the
priest by whom I knew that I had been baptized. He
replied, <q>If you were baptized by that priest, your baptism
is not perfect; for I know him, and that when he
was ordained priest, he could in no wise, by reason of
the dulness of his understanding, learn the ministry of
catechizing and baptizing; for which reason I enjoined
upon him altogether to desist from presuming to exercise
that ministry, which he could not duly perform.</q> This
said, he set himself to catechize me that same hour; and
it came to pass that when he breathed on my face,<note place='foot'>Breathing on the face and catechizing were practised in order
to exorcise evil spirits from the hearts of catechumens (Bede,
Opp. viii, 106).</note>
straightway I felt better. He called the surgeon and
ordered him to set and bind up my skull where it was
fractured; and presently having received his blessing, I
was so much better that I mounted on horseback the
next day, and travelled with him to another place; and
being soon after perfectly recovered, I was washed in
the water of life.</q>
</p>

<p>
He continued in his bishopric thirty-three years,<note place='foot'>The Saxon Chronicle is very exact: <q>Thirty-three years,
eight months, and thirteen days.</q> This would date his episcopate
from August, 687, to May, 721, for May 7th was observed as the
day of his festival at Beverley.</note> and
then ascending to the heavenly kingdom, was buried in
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
St. Peter's Chapel, in his own monastery, which is
called, <q>In the wood of the Deiri,</q><note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_II'>2</ref>.</note> in the year of our
Lord 721. For having, by his great age, become unable
to govern his bishopric, he ordained Wilfrid,<note place='foot'>Wilfrid II: <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> IV, 23, p. <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, and note.</note> his priest,
bishop of the church of York, and retired to the aforesaid
monastery, and there ended his days in godly conversation.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_V_Chap_VII'/>
<head>Chap. VII. How Caedwalla, king of the West Saxons,
went to Rome to be baptized; and his successor Ini, also
devoutly journeyed to the same threshold of the holy
Apostles. [688 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the third year of the reign of Aldfrid,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, in 688. For Caedwalla, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>12</ref> (and note), <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XV'>15</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVI'>16</ref>.</note> Caedwalla, king
of the West Saxons, having most vigorously governed
his nation for two years, quitted his crown for the sake
of the Lord and an everlasting kingdom, and went to
Rome, being desirous to obtain the peculiar honour of
being cleansed in the baptismal font at the threshold of
the blessed Apostles, for he had learned that in Baptism
alone the entrance into the heavenly life is opened to
mankind; and he hoped at the same time, that being
made clean by Baptism, he should soon be freed from
the bonds of the flesh and pass to the eternal joys of
Heaven; both which things, by the help of the Lord,
came to pass according as he had conceived in his mind.
For coming to Rome, at the time that Sergius<note place='foot'>Sergius I, 687-701.</note> was
pope, he was baptized on the Holy Saturday before
Easter Day,<note place='foot'>Cf. II, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_IX'>9</ref>, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XIV'>14</ref> and notes.</note> in the year of our Lord 689, and being still
in his white garments,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XIV'>II, 14</ref> and note.</note> he fell sick, and was set free
from the bonds of the flesh on the 20th of April, and
obtained an entrance into the kingdom of the blessed in
Heaven. At his baptism, the aforesaid pope had given
him the name of Peter, to the end, that he might be also
united in name to the most blessed chief of the Apostles,
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
to whose most holy body his pious love had led him from
the utmost bounds of the earth. He was likewise buried
in his church, and by the pope's command an epitaph<note place='foot'>By Benedictus Crispus, Archbishop of Milan. He died in 725.</note>
was written on his tomb, wherein the memory of his
devotion might be preserved for ever, and the readers or
hearers thereof might be stirred up to give themselves
to religion by the example of what he had done.
</p>

<p>
The epitaph was this:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>High estate, wealth, offspring, a mighty kingdom,
triumphs, spoils, chieftains, strongholds, the camp, a
home; whatsoever the valour of his sires, whatsoever
himself had won, Caedwal, mighty in war, left for the
love of God, that, a pilgrim king, he might behold
Peter and Peter's seat, receive at his font pure waters of
life, and in bright draughts drink of the shining radiance
whence a quickening glory streams through all the
world. And even as he gained with eager soul the prize
of the new life, he laid aside barbaric rage, and, changed
in heart, he changed his name with joy. Sergius the
Pope bade him be called Peter, himself his father,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, Sergius was his godfather (cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>III, 7</ref>, where Oswald
stands sponsor for Cynegils). The Saxon Chronicle says he also
baptized him.</note> when
he rose born anew from the font, and the grace of Christ,
cleansing him, bore him forthwith clothed in white raiment
to the heights of Heaven. O wondrous faith of the
king, but greatest of all the mercy of Christ, into whose
counsels none may enter! For he came in safety from
the ends of the earth, even from Britain, through many
a nation, over many a sea, by many a path, and saw the
city of Romulus and looked upon Peter's sanctuary
revered, bearing mystic gifts. He shall walk in white
among the sheep of Christ in fellowship with them; for
his body is in the tomb, but his soul on high. Thou
mightest deem he did but change an earthly for a
heavenly sceptre, whom thou seest attain to the kingdom
of Christ.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Here was buried Caedwalla, called also Peter, king
of the Saxons, on the twentieth day of April, in the
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
second indiction, aged about thirty years, in the reign of
our most pious lord, the Emperor Justinian,<note place='foot'>Justinian II. He succeeded in 685 and died in 711.</note> in the
fourth year of his consulship, in the second year of the
pontificate of our Apostolic lord, Pope Sergius.</q>
</p>

<p>
When Caedwalla went to Rome, Ini<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XV'>IV, 15</ref>, and note. Thus, according to Bede's reckoning, he
reigned from 688 to 725, but the date of his abdication is variously
given.</note> succeeded to the
kingdom, being of the blood royal; and having reigned
thirty-seven years over that nation, he in like manner
left his kingdom and committed it to younger men, and
went away to the threshold of the blessed Apostles, at
the time when Gregory<note place='foot'>Gregory II., 715-731, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Preface, p. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>.</note> was pope, being desirous to
spend some part of his pilgrimage upon earth in the
neighbourhood of the holy places, that he might obtain
to be more readily received into the fellowship of the
saints in heaven. This same thing, about that time, was
wont to be done most zealously by many of the English
nation, nobles and commons, laity and clergy, men and
women.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_V_Chap_VIII'/>
<head>Chap. VIII. How, when Archbishop Theodore died,
Bertwald succeeded him as archbishop, and, among
many others whom he ordained, he made the learned
Tobias bishop of the church of Rochester. [690 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
The year after that in which Caedwalla died at Rome,
that is, 690 after the Incarnation of our Lord, Archbishop
Theodore, of blessed memory, departed this life, being
old and full of days, for he was eighty-eight years of
age; which number of years he had been wont long
before to foretell to his friends that he should live, the
same having been revealed to him in a dream. He held
the bishopric twenty-two years,<note place='foot'>He was consecrated 26th March, 668, and died, as Bede says
here, on 19th September, 690.</note> and was buried in St.
Peter's church,<note place='foot'>The church of SS. Peter and Paul. Cf. II, 3, p. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>.</note> where all the bodies of the bishops of
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
Canterbury are buried. Of whom, as well as of his
fellows of the same degree, it may rightly and truly be
said, that their bodies are buried in peace, and their
names shall live to all generations. For to say all in few
words, the English Churches gained more spiritual increase
while he was archbishop, than ever before. His
character, life, age, and death, are plainly and manifestly
described to all that resort thither, by the epitaph on his
tomb, in thirty-four heroic verses.<note place='foot'>They are elegiacs. Cf. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_X'>I, 10</ref>.</note> The first whereof
are these:
</p>

<p>
<q>Here in the tomb rests the body of the holy prelate,
called now in the Greek tongue Theodore. Chief pontiff,
blest high priest, pure doctrine he set forth to his
disciples.</q>
</p>

<p>
The last are as follow:
</p>

<p>
<q>For September had reached its nineteenth day,
when his spirit went forth from the prison-bars of the
flesh. Mounting in bliss to the gracious fellowship of
the new life, he was united to the angelic citizens in the
heights of Heaven.</q>
</p>

<p>
Bertwald<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_III'>II, 3</ref>, and <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi> <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>19</ref>, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>.</note> succeeded Theodore in the archbishopric,
being abbot of the monastery called Racuulfe,<note place='foot'>The old Roman town Reculver, in Kent. A charter of 679
exists (the oldest original English charter extant) by which King
Hlothere of Kent grants land in Thanet to Bertwald and his
monastery.</note> which
stands at the northern mouth of the river Genlade.<note place='foot'>Said to be the Inlade.</note> He
was a man learned in the Scriptures, and perfectly instructed
in ecclesiastical and monastic teaching, yet in
no wise to be compared to his predecessor. He was
chosen bishop in the year of our Lord 692,<note place='foot'>The see was, therefore, vacant for two years, possibly owing
to the political troubles of the time, cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVI'>IV, 26</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi> The further
delay of a year between Bertwald's election and consecration may
have been caused by his desire to obtain greater weight as consecrated
by the Primate of a neighbouring Church (Haddan and
Stubbs, III, 229).</note> on the first
day of July, when Wictred and Suaebhard were kings
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
in Kent;<note place='foot'>For Wictred, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVI'>IV, 26</ref>, and note. Thomas of Elmham tries to
identify Suaebhard with Suefred, son of Sebbi, king of the East
Saxons (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XI'>IV, 11</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>), and says that he made himself king of
Kent by violence, but this seems very improbable.</note> but he was ordained the next year, on Sunday
the 29th of June, by Godwin, metropolitan bishop of
Gaul,<note place='foot'>He was Archbishop of Lyons. The Church of Lyons did not
obtain the primacy over other metropolitan churches till the
eleventh century, but apparently it held a leading position even
before this time.</note> and was enthroned on Sunday the 31st of August.
Among the many bishops whom he ordained was Tobias,<note place='foot'>He was trained under Theodore and Hadrian in the School of
Canterbury; cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIII'>V, 23</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi> The date of Gebmund's death and
the succession of Tobias cannot be earlier than 696, as Gebmund
(<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>IV, 12</ref>) appears to have been present at the Kentish Witenagemot
of Bersted in that year. (Haddan and Stubbs, III, 238, 241.)
Tobias died in 726.</note>
a man instructed in the Latin, Greek, and Saxon tongues,
and otherwise of manifold learning, whom he consecrated
in the stead of Gedmund, bishop of the Church of Rochester,
who had died.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_V_Chap_IX'/>
<head>Chap. IX. How the holy man, Egbert, would have gone
into Germany to preach, but could not; and how Wictbert
went, but because he availed nothing, returned into
Ireland, whence he came. [Circ. 688 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
At that time the venerable servant of Christ, and priest,
Egbert,<note place='foot'>III, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_IV'>4</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVII'>27</ref>; IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_III'>3</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVI'>26</ref>, and <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi> cc. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_X'>10</ref>, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XX'>22</ref>, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>.</note> who is to be named with all honour, and who,
as was said before, lived as a stranger and pilgrim in
Ireland to obtain hereafter a country in heaven, purposed
in his mind to profit many, taking upon him the
work of an apostle, and, by preaching the Gospel, to
bring the Word of God to some of those nations that had
not yet heard it; many of which tribes he knew to be in
Germany, from whom the Angles or Saxons, who now
inhabit Britain, are known to have derived their race
and origin; for which reason they are still corruptly
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
called <q>Garmans</q><note place='foot'>The name does not occur in any Celtic literature which we
possess. All the evidence seems to show that the Celts have
always called the English <q>Saxons.</q> <q>Ellmyn,</q> for Allemanni,
occurs sometimes in Welsh poetry (Rhŷs, <q>Celtic Britain</q>).</note> by the neighbouring nation of the
Britons. Such are the Frisians, the Rugini, the Danes,
the Huns, the Old Saxons, and the Boructuari.<note place='foot'>The Frisians at this time occupied the coastland from the
Maas to the region beyond the Ems. The Rugini are probably the
Rugii (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Tacitus, Germania, Chapter XLIII). They were on the
shores of the Baltic, probably about the mouth of the Oder (the
name survives in Rügen and Rügenwalde). They are found with
other North German tribes in the army of Attila, and afterwards
formed a settlement on the Lower Danube. The Danes were
mainly in Jutland, Fünen, and the extreme south of Scandinavia.
The Huns, who appeared in Europe towards the end of the fourth
century and menaced both the Eastern and Western Empires,
were, after Attila's death, driven eastwards, and settled near the
Pontus, disappearing among the Bulgarians and other kindred
tribes. The Old Saxons, or Saxons of the Continent (cf. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XV'>I, 15</ref>),
occupied both sides of the Elbe. The name Saxon does not occur
in the oldest accounts of the Germans. Probably it was a new
name for a union of nations which comprised the Cherusci, Chauci,
Angrivarii (and perhaps other tribes) of Tacitus. The Boructuari
are the Bructeri in Westphalia (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Zeuss, <q>Die Deutschen und
die Nachbarstämme</q>).</note> There
are also in the same parts many other peoples still
enslaved to pagan rites, to whom the aforesaid soldier of
Christ determined to go, sailing round Britain, if haply
he could deliver any of them from Satan, and bring them
to Christ; or if this might not be, he was minded to
go to Rome, to see and adore the thresholds of the holy
Apostles and martyrs of Christ.
</p>

<p>
But a revelation from Heaven and the working of God
prevented him from achieving either of these enterprises;
for when he had made choice of most courageous companions,
fit to preach the Word, inasmuch as they were
renowned for their good deeds and their learning, and
when all things necessary were provided for the voyage,
there came to him on a certain day early in the morning
one of the brethren, who had been a disciple of the
priest, Boisil,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVII'>IV, 27</ref> (note) and <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVIII'>28</ref>.</note> beloved of God, and had ministered to
him in Britain, when the said Boisil was provost of the
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
monastery of Mailros,<note place='foot'>Melrose; cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVI'>III, 26</ref>; <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVII'>IV, 27</ref>, and <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XII'>12</ref>.</note> under the Abbot Eata, as has
been said above.<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVII'>IV, 27</ref>. Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVI'>III, 26</ref>; IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>12</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVIII'>28</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_II'>V, 2</ref>.</note> This brother told him a vision which
he had seen that night. <q>When after matins,</q> said he,
<q>I had laid me down in my bed, and was fallen into a
light slumber, Boisil, that was sometime my master and
brought me up in all love, appeared to me, and asked,
whether I knew him? I said, <q>Yes, you are Boisil.</q> He
answered, <q>I am come to bring Egbert a message from
our Lord and Saviour, which must nevertheless be delivered
to him by you. Tell him, therefore, that he
cannot perform the journey he has undertaken; for it is
the will of God that he should rather go to teach the
monasteries of Columba.</q></q><note place='foot'>Cf. III, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_III'>3</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_IV'>4</ref>, and notes; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the monasteries which owed their
origin to Columba and were included in the <q>province</q> of Iona.
They are distinguished from those which are mentioned in c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XV'>15</ref>
as <q>ab Hiensium dominio liberi.</q></note> Now Columba was the
first teacher of the Christian faith to the Picts beyond
the mountains northward, and the first founder of the
monastery in the island of Hii, which was for a long time
much honoured by many tribes of the Scots and Picts.
The said Columba is now by some called Columcille, the
name being compounded from <q>Columba</q> and <q>Cella.</q><note place='foot'>His baptismal name was Colum (<foreign rend='italic'>columba</foreign> = a dove). He is said
to have acquired the name of Colum-cille, because in his youth he
was so constantly in the <q>cell</q> or oratory.</note>
Egbert, having heard the words of the vision, charged
the brother that had told it him, not to tell it to any
other, lest haply it should be a lying vision. But when
he considered the matter secretly with himself, he apprehended
that it was true, yet would not desist from preparing
for his voyage which he purposed to make to
teach those nations.
</p>

<p>
A few days after the aforesaid brother came again to
him, saying that Boisil had that night again appeared to
him in a vision after matins, and said, <q>Why did you
tell Egbert so negligently and after so lukewarm a
manner that which I enjoined upon you to say? Yet, go
now and tell him, that whether he will or no, he must go
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
to Columba's monasteries, because their ploughs are not
driven straight; and he must bring them back into the
right way.</q> Hearing this, Egbert again charged the
brother not to reveal the same to any man. Though
now assured of the vision, he nevertheless attempted to
set forth upon his intended voyage with the brethren.
When they had put aboard all that was requisite for so
long a voyage, and had waited some days for fair winds,
there arose one night so violent a storm, that part of
what was on board was lost, and the ship itself was left
lying on its side in the sea. Nevertheless, all that belonged
to Egbert and his companions was saved. Then
he, saying, in the words of the prophet, <q>For my sake
this great tempest is upon you,</q><note place='foot'>Jonah, i, 12.</note> withdrew himself from
that undertaking and was content to remain at home.
</p>

<p>
But one of his companions, called Wictbert,<note place='foot'>Nothing more is known of him. Alcuin mentions him in his life
of Wilbrord. His name is included in a list of the eleven companions
of Wilbrord given in a life of St. Suidbert (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi>
c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XI'>11</ref>), but no value is to be attached to it (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Haddan and Stubbs,
III, 225). Bede distinctly says that he retired from missionary
efforts after this unsuccessful attempt.</note> notable
for his contempt of the world and for his learning and
knowledge, for he had lived many years as a stranger
and pilgrim in Ireland, leading a hermit's life in great
perfection, took ship, and arriving in Frisland, preached
the Word of salvation for the space of two whole years
to that nation and to its king, Rathbed;<note place='foot'>The story is told that at one time Rathbed was about to receive
baptism at the hands of St. Wulfram, Archbishop of Sens, but
drew back on being told that his ancestors were among the lost,
refusing to go to Heaven without them. His perpetual wars with
the Franks ended in his defeat and expulsion, and he died in 719.</note> but reaped no
fruit of all his great labour among his barbarous hearers.
Returning then to the chosen place of his pilgrimage, he
gave himself up to the Lord in his wonted life of silence,
and since he could not be profitable to strangers by teaching
them the faith, he took care to be the more profitable
to his own people by the example of his virtue.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_V_Chap_X'/>
<head>Chap. X. How Wilbrord, preaching in Frisland, converted
many to Christ; and how his two companions, the
Hewalds, suffered martyrdom. [690 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
When the man of God, Egbert, perceived that neither
he himself was permitted to go and preach to the nations,
being withheld for the sake of some other advantage to
the holy Church, whereof he had been forewarned by a
revelation; nor that Wictbert, when he went into those
parts, had availed to do anything; he nevertheless still
attempted to send holy and industrious men to the work
of the Word, among whom the most notable was Wilbrord,<note place='foot'>The authority for Wilbrord's life is Alcuin, who wrote it both
in prose and verse. Wilbrord was born in 657 or 658 in Northumbria,
and was handed over by his mother to the monks at Ripon in
his infancy. His father, Wilgils, became a hermit on a promontory
at the mouth of the Humber. At the age of twenty he went to Ireland
for the sake of study and a stricter life. In 690 he set out for
Frisland with eleven others, landed at Katwyk and went to Utrecht,
which was afterwards his episcopal see (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XI'>11</ref>).</note>
a man eminent for his merit and rank as priest.
They arrived there, twelve in number, and turning aside
to Pippin,<note place='foot'>They turned aside to Pippin on finding Rathbed obdurate.
Pippin of Heristal, Mayor of the Palace of the Austrasian kings,
had defeated the Neustrians at Testry in 687 and was now the
actual ruler of the Franks, though it was his grandson, Pippin the
Short, who first assumed royal power.</note> duke of the Franks, were gladly received by
him; and as he had lately subdued the nearer part of
Frisland, and expelled King Rathbed,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. 9, p. <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, and note.</note> he sent them
thither to preach, supporting them at the same time with
his sovereign authority, that none might molest them in
their preaching, and bestowing many favours on those
who consented to receive the faith. Thus it came to
pass, that with the help of the Divine grace, in a short
time they converted many from idolatry to the faith of
Christ.
</p>

<p>
Following their example, two other priests of the
English nation, who had long lived as strangers in Ireland,
for the sake of the eternal country, went into the
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
province of the Old Saxons, if haply they could there win
any to Christ by their preaching. They were alike in name
as in devotion, Hewald being the name of both, with
this distinction, that, on account of the different colour
of their hair, the one was called Black Hewald and the
other White Hewald.<note place='foot'>Roger of Wendover places their mission in 695. It must have
been later than Wilbrord's in 690.</note> They were both full of religious
piety, but Black Hewald was the more learned of the
two in Scripture. When they came into the province,
these men took up their lodging in the guesthouse of a
certain township-reeve, and asked of him that he would
conduct them to the ealdorman<note place='foot'><q>Satrap,</q> cf. Stubbs, Constitutional History, i, pp. 41-42.
From this passage and similar notices of the Continental Saxons
he infers that they had remained free from Roman influences and
from any foreign intermixture of blood or institutions. <q>They had
preserved the ancient features of German life in their purest forms....
King Alfred, when he translated Bede had no difficulty in
recognizing in the satrap the ealdorman, in the villicus the <foreign rend='italic'>tungerefa</foreign>,
in the vicus the <foreign rend='italic'>tunscipe</foreign> of his own land.</q></note> who was over him, for
that they had a message concerning matters of importance
to communicate to him. For those Old Saxons
have no king, but many ealdormen set over their nation;
and when any war is on the point of breaking out, they
cast lots indifferently, and on whomsoever the lot falls,
him they all follow and obey during the time of war;
but as soon as the war is ended, all those ealdormen
are again equal in power. So the reeve received and
entertained them in his house some days, promising to
send them to the ealdorman who was over him, as they
desired.
</p>

<p>
But when the barbarians perceived that they were of
another religion,&mdash;for they continually gave themselves
to singing of psalms and prayer, and daily offered up to
God the Sacrifice of the saving Victim, having with them
sacred vessels and a consecrated table for an altar,&mdash;they
began to grow suspicious of them, lest if they
should come into the presence of their ealdorman, and
converse with him, they should turn his heart from their
gods, and convert him to the new religion of the Christian
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
faith; and thus by degrees all their province should be
forced to change its old worship for a new. Wherefore
on a sudden they laid hold of them and put them to
death; and White Hewald they slew outright with the
sword; but they put Black Hewald to lingering torture
and tore him limb from limb in horrible fashion, and
they threw their bodies into the Rhine. The ealdorman,
whom they had desired to see, hearing of it, was very
angry that strangers who desired to come to him had
not been suffered to come; and therefore he sent and
put to death all those villagers and burned their village.
The aforesaid priests and servants of Christ suffered on
the 3rd of October.<note place='foot'>The year cannot be fixed.</note>
</p>

<p>
Miracles from Heaven were not lacking at their
martyrdom. For their dead bodies, having been cast into
the river by the pagans, as has been said, were carried
against the stream for the space of almost forty miles, to
the place where their companions were. Moreover, a
long ray of light, reaching up to heaven, shone every
night above them wheresoever they chanced to be, and
that too in the sight of the very pagans that had slain
them. Moreover, one of them appeared in a vision by
night to one of his companions, whose name was Tilmon,
a man of renown and of noble birth in this world, who
having been a thegn had become a monk, telling him
that he might find their bodies in that place, where he
should see rays of light reaching from heaven to the
earth. And so it befell; and their bodies being found,
were buried with the honour due to martyrs; and the
day of their passion or of the finding of their bodies, is
celebrated in those parts with fitting veneration. Finally,
Pippin, the most glorious duke of the Franks, learning
these things, caused the bodies to be brought to him, and
buried them with much honour in the church of the city
of Cologne, on the Rhine.<note place='foot'>The Church of St. Cunibert, Cologne (Gallican Martyrology,
quoted by Smith).</note> And it is said that a spring
burst forth in the place where they were killed, which to
this day affords a plentiful stream in that same place.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_V_Chap_XI'/>
<head>Chap. XI. How the venerable Suidbert in Britain, and
Wilbrord at Rome, were ordained bishops for Frisland.
[692 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
At their first coming into Frisland, as soon as Wilbrord
found that he had leave given him by the prince to preach
there, he made haste to go to Rome, where Pope Sergius<note place='foot'>Sergius I: <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_VII'>7</ref>.</note>
then presided over the Apostolic see, that he might undertake
the desired work of preaching the Gospel to the
nations, with his licence and blessing; and hoping to
receive of him some relics of the blessed Apostles and
martyrs of Christ; to the end, that when he destroyed
the idols,<note place='foot'>Alcuin tells how he killed some of the sacred cattle of the god
Fosite, a son of Balder, in Heligoland, and baptized three men in
his well.</note> and erected churches in the nation to which he
preached, he might have the relics of saints at hand to
put into them, and having deposited them there, might
accordingly dedicate each of those places to the honour
of the saint whose relics they were. He desired also
there to learn or to receive many other things needful for
so great a work. Having obtained his desire in all these
matters, he returned to preach.
</p>

<p>
At which time, the brothers who were in Frisland,
attending on the ministry of the Word, chose out of their
own number a man of sober life, and meek of heart,
called Suidbert,<note place='foot'>A life of him by Marcellinus (<hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_IX'>9</ref>, note on Wictbert) is
worthless historically. Besides what we learn from Bede, we have
the date of his death (713) given by the <q>Annales Francorum.</q></note> to be ordained bishop for them. He,
being sent into Britain, was consecrated, at their request,
by the most reverend Bishop Wilfrid, who, having been
driven out of his country, chanced then to be living in
banishment among the Mercians;<note place='foot'>This was after Wilfrid's second expulsion (<ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>V, 19</ref>). Bertwald
was elected in July, 692, and returned from the Continent in
August, 693 (<hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_VIII'>8</ref>).</note> for Kent had no
bishop at that time, Theodore being dead, and Bertwald,
his successor, who had gone beyond the sea to be
ordained, having not yet returned to his episcopal see.
</p>

<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>

<p>
The said Suidbert, being made bishop, returned from
Britain, and not long after departed to the Boructuari;
and by his preaching brought many of them into the way
of truth; but the Boructuari being not long after subdued
by the Old Saxons, those who had received the
Word were dispersed abroad; and the bishop himself
with certain others went to Pippin, who, at the request
of his wife, Blithryda,<note place='foot'>The usual form of the name is Plectrude.</note> gave him a place of abode in a
certain island on the Rhine, called in their tongue,
Inlitore;<note place='foot'>Kaiserwerth on the Rhine, where it is believed that his relics
still remain in a silver shrine in the thirteenth-century church. (For
the preposition, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> II, 14, p. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, note 5.)</note> there he built a monastery, which his successors
still possess, and for a time dwelt in it, leading
a most continent life, and there ended his days.
</p>

<p>
When they who had gone thither had spent some
years teaching in Frisland, Pippin, with the consent of
them all, sent the venerable Wilbrord to Rome, where
Sergius was still pope, desiring that he might be consecrated
archbishop over the nation of the Frisians;
which was accordingly done, as he had made request, in
the year of our Lord 696. He was consecrated in the
church of the Holy Martyr Cecilia,<note place='foot'>This was Santa Cecilia in Trastevere. The festival is 22nd
November. As to the year, Mr. Plummer considers that an entry
in an old calendar belonging to Epternach, near Trèves, Wilbrord's
own monastery, giving the date 695, is almost certainly by Wilbrord
himself.</note> on her festival; and
the said pope gave him the name of Clement, and forthwith
sent him back to his bishopric, to wit, fourteen
days after his arrival in the city.
</p>

<p>
Pippin gave him a place for his episcopal see, in his
famous fort, which in the ancient language of those
people is called Wiltaburg, that is, the town of the
Wilts; but, in the Gallic tongue, Trajectum.<note place='foot'>Utrecht. A distinction has been drawn between the two
places, Wiltaburg, or Wiltenburg, being a village near Utrecht,
but the names appear to be interchangeable.</note> The most
reverend prelate having built a church there,<note place='foot'>The Church of St. Saviour. He also rebuilt a small church
which had been destroyed by the pagans, and consecrated it in
honour of St. Martin (Letter of St. Boniface to Pope Stephen).
The cathedral stands on the site of this church.</note> and
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
preaching the Word of faith far and near, drew many
from their errors, and built many churches and not a few
monasteries. For not long after he himself constituted
other bishops in those parts from the number of the
brethren that either came with him or after him to
preach there; of whom some are now fallen asleep in the
Lord; but Wilbrord himself, surnamed Clement, is still
living, venerable for his great age, having been thirty-six
years a bishop, and now, after manifold conflicts of
the heavenly warfare, he longs with all his heart for the
recompense of the reward in Heaven.<note place='foot'>Bede writes in 731. As Alcuin says Wilbrord lived to be
eighty-one years of age, he must have died in 738 or 739. Boniface
is fairly accurate when he says that he preached for fifty years.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_V_Chap_XII'/>
<head>Chap. XII. How one in the province of the Northumbrians,
rose from the dead, and related many things
which he had seen, some to be greatly dreaded and some
to be desired. [Circ. 696 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
At this time a memorable miracle, and like to those of
former days, was wrought in Britain; for, to the end
that the living might be roused from the death of the
soul, a certain man, who had been some time dead, rose
again to the life of the body, and related many memorable
things that he had seen; some of which I have
thought fit here briefly to describe. There was a certain
householder in that district of the Northumbrians which
is called Incuneningum,<note place='foot'>Mr. Skene (<q>Celtic Scotland,</q> i., p. 219) has shown that the
place cannot be Cunningham in Ayrshire, which was not in Northumbria,
but in Strathclyde, and not at that time subject to Northumbria.
He suggests Tininghame in East Lothian, which Simeon
of Durham calls Intiningaham, and places in the diocese of Lindisfarne
(C being a scribe's error for T). Chester-le-Street (Saxon:
Cunungaceaster) has also been suggested.</note> who led a godly life, with all
his house. This man fell sick, and his sickness daily
increasing, he was brought to extremity, and died in the
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
beginning of the night; but at dawn he came to life
again, and suddenly sat up, whereat all those that sat
about the body weeping fled away in great terror, only
his wife, who loved him better, though trembling and
greatly afraid, remained with him. And he comforting
her, said, <q>Fear not, for I am now in very deed risen
from death whereof I was holden, and permitted again
to live among men; nevertheless, hereafter I must not
live as I was wont, but after a very different manner.</q>
Then rising immediately, he went to the oratory of the
little town, and continuing in prayer till day, forthwith
divided all his substance into three parts; one whereof
he gave to his wife, another to his children, and the
third, which he kept himself, he straightway distributed
among the poor. Not long after, being set free from the
cares of this world, he came to the monastery of Mailros,<note place='foot'>Melrose, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVI'>III, 26</ref>; <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVII'>IV, 27</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_IX'>V, 9</ref>.</note>
which is almost enclosed by the winding of the river
Tweed, and having received the tonsure, went apart into
a place of abode which the abbot had provided, and there
he continued till the day of his death, in so great contrition
of mind and mortifying of the body, that even if
his tongue had been silent, his life would have declared
that he had seen many things either to be dreaded or
coveted, which were hidden from other men.
</p>

<p>
Thus he related what he had seen.<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIX'>III, 19</ref>. On mediaeval visions, cf. Plummer, <hi rend='italic'>ad loc.</hi>, and
Bright, p. 144.</note> <q rend='pre'>He that led me
had a countenance full of light, and shining raiment, and
we went in silence, as it seemed to me, towards the
rising of the summer sun. And as we walked we came
to a broad and deep valley of infinite length; it lay on
our left, and one side of it was exceeding terrible with
raging flames, the other no less intolerable for violent
hail and cold snows drifting and sweeping through all
the place. Both sides were full of the souls of men
which seemed to be tossed from one side to the other
as it were by a violent storm; for when they could no
longer endure the fervent heat, the hapless souls leaped
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
into the midst of the deadly cold; and finding no rest
there, they leaped back again to be burnt in the midst of
the unquenchable flames. Now whereas an innumerable
multitude of misshapen spirits were thus tormented far
and near with this interchange of misery, as far as I
could see, without any interval of rest, I began to think
that peradventure this might be Hell, of whose intolerable
torments I had often heard men talk. My guide, who
went before me, answered to my thought, saying, <q>Think
not so, for this is not the Hell you believe it to be.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When he had led me farther by degrees, sore dismayed
by that dread sight, on a sudden I saw the place
before us begin to grow dark and filled with shadows.
When we entered into them, the shadows by degrees
grew so thick, that I could see nothing else, save only
the darkness and the shape and garment of him that led
me. As we went on <q>through the shades in the lone
night,</q><note place='foot'>Vergil, Aen. VI, 268.</note> lo! on a sudden there appeared before us masses
of foul flame constantly rising as it were out of a great
pit, and falling back again into the same. When I had
been led thither, my guide suddenly vanished, and left
me alone in the midst of darkness and these fearful
sights. As those same masses of fire, without intermission,
at one time flew up and at another fell back into
the bottom of the abyss, I perceived that the summits of
all the flames, as they ascended were full of the spirits
of men, which, like sparks flying upwards with the smoke,
were sometimes thrown on high, and again, when the
vapours of the fire fell, dropped down into the depths
below. Moreover, a stench, foul beyond compare, burst
forth with the vapours, and filled all those dark places.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Having stood there a long time in much dread, not
knowing what to do, which way to turn, or what end
awaited me, on a sudden I heard behind me the sound
of a mighty and miserable lamentation, and at the same
time noisy laughter, as of a rude multitude insulting
captured enemies. When that noise, growing plainer,
came up to me, I beheld a crowd of evil spirits dragging
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
five souls of men, wailing and shrieking, into the midst
of the darkness, whilst they themselves exulted and
laughed. Among those human souls, as I could discern,
there was one shorn like a clerk, one a layman, and one
a woman. The evil spirits that dragged them went down
into the midst of the burning pit; and it came to pass
that as they went down deeper, I could no longer distinguish
between the lamentation of the men and the
laughing of the devils, yet I still had a confused sound
in my ears. In the meantime, some of the dark spirits
ascended from that flaming abyss, and running forward,
beset me on all sides, and with their flaming eyes and
the noisome fire which they breathed forth from their
mouths and nostrils, tried to choke me; and threatened
to lay hold on me with fiery tongs, which they had in
their hands, yet they durst in no wise touch me, though
they assayed to terrify me. Being thus on all sides encompassed
with enemies and shades of darkness, and
casting my eyes hither and thither if haply anywhere help
might be found whereby I might be saved, there appeared
behind me, on the way by which I had come, as it were,
the brightness of a star shining amidst the darkness;
which waxing greater by degrees, came rapidly towards
me: and when it drew near, all those evil spirits, that
sought to carry me away with their tongs, dispersed and
fled.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Now he, whose approach put them to flight, was
the same that led me before; who, then turning towards
the right, began to lead me, as it were, towards the
rising of the winter sun, and having soon brought me
out of the darkness, led me forth into an atmosphere of
clear light. While he thus led me in open light, I saw a
vast wall before us, the length on either side, and the
height whereof, seemed to be altogether boundless. I
began to wonder why we went up to the wall, seeing no
door in it, nor window, nor any way of ascent. But
when we came to the wall, we were presently, I know
not by what means, on the top of it, and lo! there was
a wide and pleasant plain full of such fragrance of
blooming flowers that the marvellous sweetness of the
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
scents immediately dispelled the foul stench of the dark
furnace which had filled my nostrils. So great was the
light shed over all this place that it seemed to exceed
the brightness of the day, or the rays of the noontide
sun. In this field were innumerable companies of men
clothed in white, and many seats of rejoicing multitudes.
As he led me through the midst of bands of happy inhabitants,
I began to think that this perchance might be
the kingdom of Heaven, of which I had often heard tell.
He answered to my thought, saying, <q>Nay, this is not
the kingdom of Heaven, as you think.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When we had also passed those mansions of blessed
spirits, and gone farther on, I saw before me a much
more beautiful light than before, and therein heard sweet
sounds of singing, and so wonderful a fragrance was
shed abroad from the place, that the other which I had
perceived before and thought so great, then seemed to
me but a small thing; even as that wondrous brightness
of the flowery field, compared with this which I now
beheld, appeared mean and feeble. When I began to
hope that we should enter that delightful place, my guide,
on a sudden stood still; and straightway turning, led
me back by the way we came.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>In our return, when we came to those joyous mansions
of the white-robed spirits, he said to me, <q>Do you
know what all these things are which you have seen?</q>
I answered, <q>No,</q> and then he said, <q>That valley which
you beheld terrible with flaming fire and freezing cold,
is the place in which the souls of those are tried and
punished, who, delaying to confess and amend their
crimes, at length have recourse to repentance at the
point of death, and so go forth from the body; but
nevertheless because they, even at their death, confessed
and repented, they shall all be received into the kingdom
of Heaven at the day of judgement; but many are succoured
before the day of judgement, by the prayers of
the living and their alms and fasting, and more especially
by the celebration of Masses. Moreover that foul flaming
pit which you saw, is the mouth of Hell, into which whosoever
falls shall never be delivered to all eternity. This
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
flowery place, in which you see this fair and youthful
company, all bright and joyous, is that into which the
souls of those are received who, indeed, when they leave
the body have done good works, but who are not so
perfect as to deserve to be immediately admitted into
the kingdom of Heaven; yet they shall all, at the day of
judgement, behold Christ, and enter into the joys of His
kingdom; for such as are perfect in every word and deed
and thought, as soon as they quit the body, forthwith
enter into the kingdom of Heaven; in the neighbourhood
whereof that place is, where you heard the sound of
sweet singing amidst the savour of a sweet fragrance
and brightness of light. As for you, who must now return
to the body, and again live among men, if you will
seek diligently to examine your actions, and preserve
your manner of living and your words in righteousness
and simplicity, you shall, after death, have a place of
abode among these joyful troops of blessed souls which
you behold. For when I left you for awhile, it was for
this purpose, that I might learn what should become of
you.</q> When he had said this to me, I much abhorred returning
to the body, being delighted with the sweetness
and beauty of the place which I beheld, and with the
company of those I saw in it. Nevertheless, I durst not
ask my guide anything; but thereupon, on a sudden, I
found myself, I know not how, alive among men.</q>
</p>

<p>
Now these and other things which this man of God
had seen, he would not relate to slothful men, and such
as lived negligently; but only to those who, being terrified
with the dread of torments, or ravished with the
hope of everlasting joys, would draw from his words the
means to advance in piety. In the neighbourhood of his
cell lived one Haemgils, a monk, and eminent in the priesthood,
whose good works were worthy of his office: he
is still living, and leading a solitary life in Ireland, supporting
his declining age with coarse bread and cold
water. He often went to that man, and by repeated
questioning, heard of him what manner of things he had
seen when out of the body; by whose account those few
particulars which we have briefly set down came also to
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
our knowledge. And he related his visions to King Aldfrid,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVI'>IV, 26</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_I'>V. 1</ref>.</note>
a man most learned in all respects, and was by
him so willingly and attentively heard, that at his request
he was admitted into the monastery above-mentioned,
and received the crown of the monastic tonsure; and
the said king, whensoever he came into those parts, very
often went to hear him. At that time the abbot and priest
Ethelwald,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>. He began life in the service of St. Cuthbert. He
became first Prior, or Provost, then Abbot of Melrose, and succeeded
Eadfrid, who died in 721, as Bishop of Lindisfarne. He
enriched Lindisfarne with two treasures of art: a beautiful stone
cross which he erected there, and a cover of gold and jewels for
the Lindisfarne Gospels, written by Eadfrid in honour of St. Cuthbert.
The book is now in the British Museum, but the cover is
lost.</note> a man of godly and sober life, presided over
that monastery. He now occupies the episcopal see of
the church of Lindisfarne, leading a life worthy of his
degree.
</p>

<p>
He had a place of abode assigned him apart in that
monastery, where he might give himself more freely to
the service of his Creator in continual prayer. And inasmuch
as that place was on the banks of the river, he
was wont often to go into the same for the great desire
he had to do penance in his body, and oftentimes to
plunge in it, and to continue saying psalms or prayers
in the same as long as he could endure it, standing still,
while the waves flowed over him, sometimes up to the
middle, and sometimes even to the neck in water; and
when he went ashore, he never took off his cold, wet
garments till they grew warm and dry on his body.
And when in the winter the cracking pieces of ice were
floating about him, which he had himself sometimes
broken, to make room to stand or plunge in the river,
and those who beheld it would say, <q>We marvel, brother
Drythelm (for so he was called), that you are able
to endure such severe cold;</q> he answered simply, for
he was a simple and sober-spirited man, <q>I have seen
greater cold.</q> And when they said, <q>We marvel that
you choose to observe so hard a rule of continence,</q> he
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
replied, <q>I have seen harder things.</q> And so, until the
day of his calling hence, in his unwearied desire of
heavenly bliss, he subdued his aged body with daily
fasting, and forwarded the salvation of many by his
words and life.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_V_Chap_XIII'/>
<head>Chap. XIII. How another contrarywise before his death
saw a book containing his sins, which was shown him by
devils. [704-709 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
But contrarywise there was a man in the province of the
Mercians, whose visions and words, but not his manner
of life, were of profit to others, though not to himself.
In the reign of Coenred,<note place='foot'>704-709. Cf. <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>, c. 19, pp. <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>, and c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>. He was the
son of Wulfhere, but being a boy at the time of his father's death,
was passed over in favour of Ethelred, Wulfhere's brother.</note> who succeeded Ethelred, there
was a layman who was a king's thegn, no less acceptable
to the king for his outward industry, than displeasing
to him for his neglect of his own soul. The king
diligently admonished him to confess and amend, and to
forsake his evil ways, lest he should lose all time for repentance
and amendment by a sudden death. But though
frequently warned, he despised the words of salvation, and
promised that he would do penance at some future time.
In the meantime, falling sick he betook himself to his
bed, and was tormented with grievous pains. The king
coming to him (for he loved the man much) exhorted him,
even then, before death, to repent of his offences. But he
answered that he would not then confess his sins, but
would do it when he was recovered of his sickness, lest
his companions should upbraid him with having done that
for fear of death, which he had refused to do in health.
He thought he spoke very bravely, but it afterwards appeared
that he had been miserably deceived by the wiles
of the Devil.
</p>

<p>
The disease increasing, when the king came again to
visit and instruct him, he cried out straightway with a
lamentable voice, <q>What will you now? What are you
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
come for? for you can no longer do aught for my profit
or salvation.</q> The king answered, <q>Say not so; take
heed and be of sound mind.</q> <q>I am not mad,</q> replied
he, <q>but I now know the worst and have it for certain
before my eyes.</q> <q>What is that?</q> said the king. <q>Not
long since,</q> said he, <q>there came into this room two fair
youths, and sat down by me, the one at my head, and
the other at my feet. One of them drew forth a book
most beautiful, but very small, and gave it me to read;
looking into it, I there found all the good actions I had
ever done in my life written down, and they were very
few and inconsiderable. They took back the book and
said nothing to me. Then, on a sudden, appeared an army
of evil spirits of hideous countenance, and they beset this
house without, and sitting down filled the greater part of
it within. Then he, who by the blackness of his gloomy
face, and his sitting above the rest, seemed to be the
chief of them, taking out a book terrible to behold, of a
monstrous size, and of almost insupportable weight,
commanded one of his followers to bring it to me to
read. Having read it, I found therein most plainly
written in hideous characters, all the crimes I ever committed,
not only in word and deed, but even in the least
thought; and he said to those glorious men in white raiment
who sat by me, <q>Why sit ye here, since ye know
of a surety that this man is ours?</q> They answered, <q>Ye
speak truly; take him and lead him away to fill up the
measure of your damnation.</q> This said, they forthwith
vanished, and two wicked spirits arose, having in their
hands ploughshares, and one of them struck me on the
head, and the other on the foot. And these ploughshares
are now with great torment creeping into the inward
parts of my body, and as soon as they meet I shall die,
and the devils being ready to snatch me away, I shall
be dragged into the dungeons of hell.</q>
</p>

<p>
Thus spoke that wretch in his despair, and soon after
died, and now in vain suffers in eternal torments that
penance which he failed to suffer for a short time with
the fruits of forgiveness. Of whom it is manifest, that
(as the blessed Pope Gregory writes of certain persons)
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
he did not see these things for his own sake, since they
did not avail him, but for the sake of others, who,
knowing of his end, should be afraid to put off the
time of repentance, whilst they have leisure, lest, being
prevented by sudden death, they should perish impenitent.
And whereas he saw diverse books laid before him
by the good and evil spirits, this was done by Divine dispensation,
that we may keep in mind that our deeds and
thoughts are not scattered to the winds, but are all kept
to be examined by the Supreme Judge, and will in the
end be shown us either by friendly angels or by the
enemy. And whereas the angels first drew forth a white
book, and then the devils a black one; the former a very
small one, the latter one very great; it is to be observed,
that in his first years he did some good actions, all which
he nevertheless obscured by the evil actions of his youth.
If, contrarywise, he had taken care in his youth to
correct the errors of his boyhood, and by well-doing to
put them away from the sight of God, he might have
been admitted to the fellowship of those of whom the
Psalm says, <q>Blessed are those whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. xxxi, 1, in the Vulgate (xxxii in our Psalter).</note> This story, as
I learned it of the venerable Bishop Pechthelm,<note place='foot'>Bishop of Whitern; <hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi>, cc. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>18</ref>, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>.</note> I have
thought good to set forth plainly, for the salvation of
such as shall read or hear it.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. XIV. How another in like manner, being at the
point of death, saw the place of punishment appointed
for him in Hell.</head>

<p>
I myself knew a brother, would to God I had not known
him, whose name I could mention if it were of any avail,
dwelling in a famous monastery, but himself living infamously.
He was oftentimes rebuked by the brethren
and elders of the place, and admonished to be converted
to a more chastened life; and though he would not give
ear to them, they bore with him long and patiently,
<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
on account of their need of his outward service, for he
was a cunning artificer. But he was much given to
drunkenness, and other pleasures of a careless life, and
more used to stop in his workshop day and night, than
to go to church to sing and pray and hear the Word of
life with the brethren. For which reason it befell him
according to the saying, that he who will not willingly
humble himself and enter the gate of the church must
needs be led against his will into the gate of Hell, being
damned. For he falling sick, and being brought to extremity,
called the brethren, and with much lamentation,
like one damned, began to tell them, that he saw Hell
opened, and Satan sunk in the depths thereof; and Caiaphas,
with the others that slew our Lord, hard by him,
delivered up to avenging flames. <q>In whose neighbourhood,</q>
said he, <q>I see a place of eternal perdition prepared
for me, miserable wretch that I am.</q> The brothers,
hearing these words, began diligently to exhort him,
that he should repent even then, whilst he was still in
the flesh. He answered in despair, <q>There is no time for
me now to change my course of life, when I have myself
seen my judgement passed.</q>
</p>

<p>
Whilst uttering these words, he died without having
received the saving Viaticum, and his body was buried
in the farthest parts of the monastery, nor did any one
dare either to say Masses or sing psalms, or even to pray
for him.<note place='foot'>Cf. 1 John, v, 16.</note> Oh how far asunder hath God put light from
darkness! The blessed Stephen, the first martyr, being
about to suffer death for the truth, saw the heavens
opened, and the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the
right hand of God;<note place='foot'>Acts, vii, 56.</note> and where he was to be after death,
there he fixed the eyes of his mind, that he might die
the more joyfully. But this workman, of darkened mind
and life, when death was at hand, saw Hell opened, and
witnessed the damnation of the Devil and his followers;
he saw also, unhappy wretch! his own prison among
them, to the end that, despairing of salvation, he might
himself die the more miserably, but might by his perdition
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>
afford cause of salvation to the living who should
hear of it. This befell of late in the province of the Bernicians,
and being noised abroad far and near, inclined
many to do penance for their sins without delay. Would
to God that this also might come to pass through the
reading of our words!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_V_Chap_XV'/>
<head>Chap. XV. How divers churches of the Scots, at the
instance of Adamnan, adopted the Catholic Easter; and
how the same wrote a book about the holy places. [703
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
At this time a great part of the Scots in Ireland,<note place='foot'>The northern Irish, and of them only those who were independent
of Iona (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi>). The southern Irish had conformed
much earlier; cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_III'>III, 3</ref>, and note.</note> and
some also of the Britons in Britain,<note place='foot'>It is not clear whether Bede means that any Britons were
converted by Adamnan. If so, they must have been Britons of
Strathclyde. The Welsh only conformed 755-777. The reference
may be to those of the Cornish Britons, subject to the West Saxons,
who were led in 705 by Aldhelm's letter to Geraint to adopt the
Catholic Easter (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi>, c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>18</ref>).</note> by the grace of God,
adopted the reasonable and ecclesiastical time of keeping
Easter. For when Adamnan,<note place='foot'>Ninth Abbot of Iona, 679-704, the author of the Life of St.
Columba.</note> priest and abbot of the
monks that were in the island of Hii, was sent by his
nation on a mission to Aldfrid, king of the English,<note place='foot'>Of Northumbria. Aldfrid, who had studied in Iona during his
exile, was his friend. Adamnan visited the king twice, first, circ.
686, when he obtained the release of the sixty Irish prisoners
taken to England by Berct in 684 (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVI'>IV, 26</ref> <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi>) and again two
years later (cf. <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi> c. 21, p. <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref>, note 2).</note> he
abode some time in that province, and saw the canonical
rites of the Church. Moreover, he was earnestly admonished
by many of the more learned sort, not to presume
to live contrary to the universal custom of the
Church, either in regard to the observance of Easter, or
any other ordinances whatsoever, with those few followers
of his dwelling in the farthest corner of the world.
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
Wherefore he so changed his mind, that he readily preferred
those things which he had seen and heard in the
English churches, to the customs which he and his
people had hitherto followed. For he was a good and
wise man, and excellently instructed in knowledge of the
Scriptures. Returning home, he endeavoured to bring his
own people that were in Hii, or that were subject to that
monastery, into the way of truth, which he had embraced
with all his heart; but he could not prevail. He sailed
over into Ireland,<note place='foot'>The Irish annals mention two voyages to Ireland subsequent
to that in 686 with the prisoners, viz., in 692 and 697, after which
he probably stayed there till after Easter, 704.</note> and preaching to those people, and
with sober words of exhortation making known to them
the lawful time of Easter, he brought back many of them,
and almost all that were free from the dominion of those
of Hii, from the error of their fathers to the Catholic
unity, and taught them to keep the lawful time of Easter.
</p>

<p>
Returning to his island, after having celebrated the
canonical Easter in Ireland, he was instant in preaching
the Catholic observance of the season of Easter in his
monastery, yet without being able to achieve his end;
and it so happened that he departed this life before the
next year came round,<note place='foot'>On 23rd September, 704. (The dates are those of Tighernach
and the <q>Annales Cambriae.</q>)</note> the Divine goodness so ordaining
it, that as he was a great lover of peace and unity, he
should be taken away to everlasting life before he should
be obliged, on the return of the season of Easter, to be
at greater variance with those that would not follow him
into the truth.
</p>

<p>
This same man wrote a book concerning the holy
places, of great profit to many readers; his authority
was the teaching and dictation of Arculf, a bishop of
Gaul,<note place='foot'>Adamnan's <q>De Locis Sanctis,</q> and Bede's account here, are
the only sources of information with regard to this bishop. Adamnan's
book is based on the narrative of Arculf compared with
other authorities. Bede, again, in his own work on the the same
subject, made selections from Adamnan, using also other authorities,
<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> Josephus.</note> who had gone to Jerusalem for the sake of the
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>
holy places; and having wandered over all the Promised
Land, travelled also to Damascus, Constantinople, Alexandria,
and many islands in the sea, and returning home
by ship, was cast upon the western coast of Britain by
a great tempest. After many adventures he came to the
aforesaid servant of Christ, Adamnan, and being found
to be learned in the Scriptures, and acquainted with the
holy places, was most gladly received by him and gladly
heard, insomuch that whatsoever he said that he had
seen worthy of remembrance in the holy places, Adamnan
straightway set himself to commit to writing. Thus
he composed a work, as I have said, profitable to many,
and chiefly to those who, being far removed from those
places where the patriarchs and Apostles lived, know no
more of them than what they have learnt by reading.
Adamnan presented this book to King Aldfrid, and
through his bounty it came to be read by lesser persons.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, he had copies made of it.</note>
The writer thereof was also rewarded by him with many
gifts and sent back into his country. I believe it will be
of advantage to our readers if we collect some passages
from his writings, and insert them in this our History.<note place='foot'>Nevertheless he quotes his own book rather than Adamnan's.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chap. XVI. The account given in the aforesaid book of
the place of our Lord's Nativity, Passion, and Resurrection.</head>

<p>
He wrote concerning the place of the Nativity of our
Lord, after this manner:<note place='foot'>Cf. Warren and Conder, <q>Survey of Western Palestine</q>:
<q>Bethlehem, a well-built stone town, standing on a narrow ridge
which runs east and west ... towards the east is the open market
place, and, beyond this, the convent in which is the fourth
century church of St. Mary, including the Grotto of the Nativity
beneath the main apse.</q></note> <q>Bethlehem, the city of David,
is situated on a narrow ridge, encompassed on all sides
with valleys, being a mile in length from west to east,
and having a low wall without towers, built along the
edge of the level summit. In the eastern corner thereof
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
is a sort of natural half cave, the outward part whereof
is said to have been the place where our Lord was born;
the inner is called the manger of our Lord. This cave
within is all covered with rich marble, and over the particular
spot where our Lord is said to have been born,
stands the great church of St. Mary.</q> He likewise wrote
about the place of His Passion and Resurrection in this
manner: <q>Entering the city of Jerusalem on the north
side, the first place to be visited, according to the disposition
of the streets, is the church of Constantine,
called the Martyrium. It was built by the Emperor Constantine,
in a royal and magnificent manner, because the
Cross of our Lord was said to have been found there by
his mother Helena. Thence, to the westward, is seen
the church of Golgotha, in which is also to be found the
rock which once bore the Cross to which the Lord's body
was nailed, and now it upholds a large silver cross, having
a great brazen wheel with lamps hanging over it. Under
the place of our Lord's Cross, a crypt is hewn out of the
rock, in which the Sacrifice is offered on an altar for the
dead that are held in honour, their bodies remaining
meanwhile in the street. To the westward of this church
is the round church of the Anastasis or Resurrection of
our Lord, encompassed with three walls, and supported
by twelve columns. Between each of the walls is a broad
passage, which contains three altars at three different
points of the middle wall; to the south, the north, and
the west. It has eight doors or entrances in a straight
line through the three walls; four whereof face the
south-east, and four the east.<note place='foot'><q>Vulturnus</q> seems to be distinguished from its Greek equivalent,
<q>Eurus.</q></note> In the midst of it is the
round tomb of our Lord cut out of the rock, the top of
of which a man standing within can touch with his hand;
on the east is the entrance, against which that great
stone was set. To this day the tomb bears the marks of
the iron tools within, but on the outside it is all covered
with marble to the very top of the roof, which is adorned
with gold, and bears a large golden cross. In the north
<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>
part of the tomb the sepulchre of our Lord is hewn out
of the same rock, seven feet in length, and three hand-breadths
above the floor; the entrance being on the
south side, where twelve lamps burn day and night, four
within the sepulchre, and eight above on the edge of the
right side. The stone that was set at the entrance to the
tomb is now cleft in two; nevertheless, the lesser part of
it stands as an altar of hewn stone before the door of the
tomb; the greater part is set up as another altar, four-cornered,
at the east end of the same church, and is
covered with linen cloths. The colour of the said tomb
and sepulchre is white and red mingled together.</q><note place='foot'>The Basilica of the Anastasis was completed by Constantine
in 335 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, and destroyed in 614 by Chosroes II, King of Persia.
Other ancient travellers besides Arculf describe the Holy Places.
Eucherius, writing about 427-440, mentions the Martyrium, Golgotha
and the Anastasis, and describes their respective sites in
similar terms. Theodorus (about 530 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>) alludes to the Invention
of the Holy Cross by Helena, but the earliest authorities do not
connect her with it.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_V_Chap_XVII'/>
<head>Chap. XVII. What he likewise wrote of the place of
our Lord's Ascension, and the tombs of the patriarchs.</head>

<p>
Concerning the place of our Lord's Ascension, the aforesaid
author writes thus. <q>The Mount of Olives is equal
in height to Mount Sion, but exceeds it in breadth and
length; it bears few trees besides vines and olives, and
is fruitful in wheat and barley, for the nature of that soil
is not such as to yield thickets,<note place='foot'><q>Brucosa.</q> The adjective is not found in the dictionaries.
But Ducange has the following words from which one may, perhaps,
infer an adjective of kindred meaning: <q><foreign rend='italic'>Brua</foreign>, idem quod
supra <foreign rend='italic'>Brossa</foreign>, silvula, dumetum,</q> <q><foreign rend='italic'>Bruarium</foreign>, ericetum,</q> and
<q><foreign rend='italic'>Broca</foreign>, ager incultus, dumetum.</q></note> but grass and flowers.
On the very top of it, where our Lord ascended into
heaven, is a large round church,<note place='foot'>The Basilica of the Ascension, on the summit of Mount Olivet,
is mentioned by the Pilgrim of Bordeaux who was in Jerusalem in
333 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> No traces of the church have been found. He also
speaks of the Anastasis, which was being built at the time.</note> having round about it
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
three chapels with vaulted roofs. For the inner building
could not be vaulted and roofed, by reason of the passage
of our Lord's Body; but it has an altar on the east
side, sheltered by a narrow roof. In the midst of it are
to be seen the last Footprints of our Lord, the place where
He ascended being open to the sky; and though the
earth is daily carried away by believers, yet still it
remains, and retains the same appearance, being marked
by the impression of the Feet. Round about these lies a
brazen wheel, as high as a man's neck, having an
entrance from the west, with a great lamp hanging
above it on a pulley and burning night and day. In the
western part of the same church are eight windows; and
as many lamps, hanging opposite to them by cords,
shine through the glass as far as Jerusalem; and the
light thereof is said to thrill the hearts of the beholders
with a certain zeal and compunction. Every year, on the
day of the Ascension of our Lord, when Mass is ended,
a strong blast of wind is wont to come down, and to
cast to the ground all that are in the church.</q>
</p>

<p>
Of the situation of Hebron, and the tombs of the
fathers,<note place='foot'>Saewulf (1102 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>) writes: <q>Below is the place called Golgotha,
where Adam is said to have been raised to life by the Blood
of our Lord which fell upon him, as is said in the Passion, <q>And
many bodies of the saints which slept arose.</q> But in the sentences
of St. Augustine we read that he was buried in Hebron, where
also the three patriarchs were afterwards buried with their wives,
Abraham with Sarah, Isaac with Rebecca, and Jacob with Leah,
as well as the bones of Joseph which the children of Israel carried
with them from Egypt.</q></note> he writes thus. <q>Hebron, once a habitation
and the chief city of David's kingdom, now only showing
by its ruins what it then was, has, one furlong to the
east of it, a double cave in the valley, where the sepulchres
of the patriarchs are encompassed with a wall four-square,
their heads lying to the north. Each of the tombs
is covered with a single stone, hewn like the stones of a
church, and of a white colour, for the three patriarchs.
Adam's is of meaner and poorer workmanship, and he
lies not far from them at the farthest end of the northern
part of that wall. There are also some poorer and
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
smaller monuments of the three women. The hill Mamre
is a mile from these tombs, and is covered with grass and
flowers, having a level plain on the top. In the northern
part of it, the trunk of Abraham's oak, being twice as
high as a man, is enclosed in a church.</q>
</p>

<p>
Thus much, gathered from the works of the aforesaid
writer, according to the sense of his words, but more
briefly and in fewer words, we have thought fit to insert
in our History for the profit of readers. Whosoever
desires to know more of the contents of that book, may
seek it either in the book itself, or in that abridgement
which we have lately made from it.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'/>
<head>Chap. XVIII. How the South Saxons received Eadbert
and Eolla, and the West Saxons, Daniel and Aldhelm,
for their bishops; and of the writings of the same Aldhelm.
[705 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 705, Aldfrid, king of the Northumbrians,
died<note place='foot'>He died at Driffield (supposed to mean the <q>field of Deira</q>),
in the East Riding of Yorkshire, on 14th December, 705 (Saxon
Chronicle).</note> before the end of the twentieth year of
his reign. His son Osred,<note place='foot'>Bede and the Chronicle do not mention the usurper Eadwulf,
who held the sovereignty for eight weeks. With Aldfrid the
greatness of Northumbria, which had begun to decline after
Egfrid's defeat and death, passed away, except for a brief revival
in the time of Eadbert and his brother, Archbishop Egbert. Osred
was a tyrannical and lawless boy, and a period of political and
ecclesiastical trouble set in (cf. Bede, <q>Epistola ad Egbertum</q>;
Boniface, Ep. 62, etc.).</note> a boy about eight years of
age, succeeding him in the throne, reigned eleven years.
In the beginning of his reign, Haedde, bishop of the
West Saxons,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>III, 7</ref>; <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>IV, 12</ref>.</note> departed to the heavenly life; for he was
a good man and a just, and his life and doctrine as a
bishop were guided rather by his innate love of virtue,
than by what he had gained from books. The most
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
reverend bishop, Pechthelm, of whom we shall speak
hereafter in the proper place,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Infra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>. He has been mentioned, c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIII'>13</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi> He studied
under Aldhelm at Malmesbury (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi>).</note> and who while still
deacon or monk was for a long time with his successor
Aldhelm,<note place='foot'>The greatest scholar of his time and the man of widest influence
as a teacher. He was a West Saxon, of royal blood, born about 639;
he studied first under Hadrian in the School of Canterbury, then
under Maildufus (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi>), was ordained priest by Bishop Hlothere
(Leutherius, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>III, 7</ref>), and about the year 675 became Abbot of
Malmesbury, which under his rule grew to be a place of importance
and attracted crowds of students. On one occasion he went by
invitation of Pope Sergius to Rome. He became Bishop of Sherborne,
when in 705 the West Saxon diocese was divided (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi>).
He died in 709 in the little church of Doulting in Somerset and was
buried in St. Michael's Church at Malmesbury. He greatly
strengthened the Church in Wessex by his influence with King Ini
and his zeal in building churches and monasteries in various
places. His widespread influence, as well as his generous use of
it, is shown by his letter to Wilfrid's clergy after the Council of
Estrefeld, exhorting them to remain faithful to their bishop (v.
Haddan and Stubbs, III, 254).</note> was wont to relate that many miracles of healing
have been wrought in the place where he died,
through the merit of his sanctity; and that the men of
that province used to carry the dust thence for the sick,
and put it into water, and the drinking thereof, or sprinkling
with it, brought health to many sick men and beasts;
so that the holy dust being frequently carried away, a
great hole was made there.
</p>

<p>
Upon his death, the bishopric of that province was
divided into two dioceses.<note place='foot'>In 705. The bishopric of the West Saxons was the only one
which Theodore did not subdivide. The delay may have been due
to the political disturbances of the time, and these had come to an
end under the rule of Ini. Haedde's death removed a further
difficulty. He seems to have resisted Bertwald's attempt to divide
the diocese, for we find in 704 a council threatening the West
Saxons with excommunication if the division is not carried out.
Hampshire, Surrey, and, for a time, Sussex, were assigned to
Winchester; Berkshire, Wiltshire, Dorsetshire, and Somersetshire
to Sherborne (Haddan and Stubbs, III, 276), but the authorities
differ on this point. After the Conquest, the combined bishoprics
of Sherborne and Ramsbury (founded in 909 for Wiltshire) had their
see established at Old Sarum.</note> One of them was given to
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
Daniel,<note place='foot'>Cf. Preface, p. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, and note, and <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVI'>IV, 16</ref>. In 744 he resigned
his see and died in 745. It appears from a letter of Boniface to him
that he became blind in his old age.</note> which he governs to this day; the other to Aldhelm,
wherein he presided most vigorously four years;
both of them were fully instructed, as well in matters
touching the Church as in the knowledge of the Scriptures.
Aldhelm, when he was as yet only a priest and
abbot of the monastery which is called the city of Maildufus,<note place='foot'>Malmesbury. It was founded by an Irish monk and scholar,
Maildufus (Irish <q>Maelduib</q>), as a small settlement living under
monastic rule (<hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> note on Aldhelm).</note>
by order of a synod of his own nation, wrote a
notable book<note place='foot'>His letter to Geraint or Gerontius, king of Dumnonia (Devon
and Cornwall). A West Saxon synod in 705 appointed Aldhelm to
write a book, <q>quo maligna haeresis Britonum destrueretur</q>
(Faricius, Life of Aldhelm). He appears to have influenced only
those Britons who were subject to the West Saxons. Devon and
Cornwall did not finally conform to the Catholic Easter till early
in the tenth century.</note> against the error of the Britons, in not
celebrating Easter at the due time, and in doing divers
other things contrary to the purity of doctrine and the
peace of the church; and through the reading of this
book many of the Britons, who were subject to the West
Saxons, were led by him to adopt the Catholic celebration
of our Lord's Paschal Feast. He likewise wrote
a famous book on Virginity,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_X'>IV, 10</ref> (note on Hildilid).</note> which, after the example of
Sedulius,<note place='foot'>A poet of the fifth century (circ. 450), author of a poem called
<q>Carmen Paschale.</q> He translated it into prose and called it
<q>Opus Paschale.</q> Aldhelm wrote his prose work first.</note> he composed in twofold form, in hexameters
and in prose. He wrote some other books, being a man
most instructed in all respects, for he had a polished style,<note place='foot'>His style is turgid and grandiloquent, and, owing to the high
estimation in which he was held, his influence in this respect on
contemporary writing was harmful.</note>
and was, as I have said, of marvellous learning both in
liberal and ecclesiastical studies. On his death, Forthere<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>. A letter to him from Archbishop Bertwald is
extant. We do not know how long he lived. We have his signature
to a charter of 739.</note>
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
was made bishop in his stead, and is living at this time,
being likewise a man very learned in the Holy Scriptures.
</p>

<p>
Whilst they administered the bishopric, it was determined
by a synodal decree, that the province of the South
Saxons, which till that time belonged to the diocese of the
city of Winchester, where Daniel then presided, should
itself have an episcopal see, and a bishop of its own.<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XV'>IV, 15</ref>. The see was established at Selsey. The date of
this event is not known (Matthew of Westminster is the only
authority for 711). Bede indicates it very vaguely (<q>quibus administrantibus</q>),
and does not make it clear to whose administration
he alludes. The more obvious reference is surely to Daniel
and Aldhelm, the passage about Forthere being parenthetical, but
the other view has the authority of Haddan and Stubbs (III, 296),
viz., that he means Daniel and Forthere, and that thus the date is
fixed to some time after Aldhelm's death (709).</note>
Eadbert, at that time abbot of the monastery of Bishop
Wilfrid, of blessed memory, called Selaeseu,<note place='foot'>Selsey, cf. IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIII'>13</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIV'>14</ref>.</note> was consecrated
their first bishop. On his death, Eolla succeeded
to the office of bishop. He also died some years ago,
and the bishopric has been vacant to this day.<note place='foot'>The vacancy was filled in 733 by the appointment of Sigfrid
(<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Continuation'>Continuation</ref>).</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_V_Chap_XIX'/>
<head>Chap. XIX. How Coinred, king of the Mercians, and
Offa, king of the East Saxons, ended their days at Rome,
in the monastic habit; and of the life and death of
Bishop Wilfrid. [709 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the fourth year of the reign of Osred,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>18</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi> His fourth year was 709.</note> Coenred,<note place='foot'>C. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIII'>13</ref> and <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>19</ref> <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>, and c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>. For a similar action,
cf. Caedwalla and Ini (<hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_VII'>7</ref>) and (<hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>) Offa.</note> who
had for some time nobly governed the kingdom of the
Mercians, much more nobly quitted the sceptre of his
kingdom. For he went to Rome, and there receiving
the tonsure and becoming a monk, when Constantine<note place='foot'>Constantine I, 708-715.</note>
was pope, he continued to his last hour in prayer and
fasting and alms-deeds at the threshold of the Apostles.
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
He was succeeded in the throne by Ceolred,<note place='foot'>709-716. St. Boniface (Letter to Ethelbald) gives Ceolred a very
bad character, and says that he died impenitent at a banquet, seized
with sudden madness. He alludes to him and Osred of Northumbria
as the first kings who tampered with the privileges of the Church.</note> the son of
Ethelred, who had governed the kingdom before Coenred.
With him went the son of Sighere,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXX'>III, 30</ref>, and <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_VI'>IV, 6</ref>. Sighere reigned jointly with Sebbi. They
were succeeded by Sebbi's sons, Sighard and Swefred (<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XI'>IV, 11</ref>).
Offa probably succeeded them just before this time (709); William
of Malmesbury says he reigned for a short time. He was succeeded
by Selred (d. 746).</note> the king of the East
Saxons whom we mentioned before, by name Offa, a
youth of a most pleasing age and comeliness, and greatly
desired by all his nation to have and to hold the sceptre
of the kingdom. He, with like devotion, quitted wife,
and lands, and kindred and country, for Christ and for
the Gospel, that he might <q>receive an hundred-fold in
this life, and in the world to come life everlasting.</q><note place='foot'>St. Matt., xix, 29; St. Mark, x, 30; St. Luke, xviii, 30.</note> He
also, when they came to the holy places at Rome, received
the tonsure, and ending his life in the monastic
habit, attained to the vision of the blessed Apostles in
Heaven, as he had long desired.
</p>

<p>
The same year that they departed from Britain, the
great bishop, Wilfrid, ended his days in the province
called Inundalum,<note place='foot'>Oundle in Northamptonshire, where he had a monastery on
land given him by Wulfhere of Mercia. For the form of the name,
cf. <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>, <q>in provincia Undalum.</q> Here the preposition is prefixed
as often; <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XIV'>II, 14</ref>, note. Wilfrid died on a Thursday in
October: there is some uncertainty about the day of the month.</note> after he had been bishop forty-five
years.<note place='foot'>Cf. the epitaph (<hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>) and c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>, where Bede places his consecration
in 664. This is supported by William of Malmesbury, but
Eddius says he was bishop for forty-six years.</note> His body, being laid in a coffin, was carried to
his monastery, which is called Inhrypum,<note place='foot'>Ripon, <hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi>, p. 56. In the tenth century, Odo, Archbishop of
Canterbury, removed certain relics to Canterbury, believing them
to be the body of Wilfrid. At Ripon it was maintained that the
relics were those of Wilfrid II.</note> and buried in
the church of the blessed Apostle Peter, with the honour
due to so great a prelate. Concerning whose manner of
<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>
life, let us now turn back, and briefly make mention of
the things which were done.<note place='foot'>Our main authority for the life of Wilfrid is Eddius (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_II'>IV, 2</ref>).
Bede's account is remarkable for its omissions, though it gives a
few facts which Eddius omits.</note> Being a boy of a good disposition,
and virtuous beyond his years, he conducted
himself so modestly and discreetly in all points, that he
was deservedly beloved, respected, and cherished by his
elders as one of themselves.<note place='foot'>His birth must be placed in 634 (cf. <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>, his consecration at
the age of thirty). His father was a Northumbrian thegn. He is
said to have had an unkind stepmother. He was sent by his father
to the court of Oswy, thence, by Eanfled (cf. II, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_IX'>9</ref>, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XX'>20</ref>; III, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XV'>15</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>,
<hi rend='italic'>et saep.</hi>) to Lindisfarne, at that time under the rule of Aidan.</note> At fourteen years of age he
chose rather the monastic than the secular life; which,
when he had signified to his father, for his mother was
dead, he readily consented to his godly wishes and
desires, and advised him to persist in that wholesome
purpose. Wherefore he came to the isle of Lindisfarne,
and there giving himself to the service of the monks, he
strove diligently to learn and to practise those things
which belong to monastic purity and piety; and being of
a ready wit, he speedily learned the psalms and some
other books, having not yet received the tonsure, but
being in no small measure marked by those virtues of
humility and obedience which are more important than
the tonsure; for which reason he was justly loved by his
elders and his equals. Having served God some years in
that monastery, and being a youth of a good understanding,
he perceived that the way of virtue delivered
by the Scots was in no wise perfect, and he resolved to
go to Rome, to see what ecclesiastical or monastic rites
were in use at the Apostolic see. When he told the
brethren, they commended his design, and advised him
to carry out that which he purposed. He forthwith
went to Queen Eanfled, for he was known to her, and it
was by her counsel and support that he had been admitted
into the aforesaid monastery, and he told her of
his desire to visit the threshold of the blessed Apostles.
She, being pleased with the youth's good purpose, sent
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
him into Kent, to King Earconbert,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_III_Chap_VIII'>III, 8</ref>. He was the son of Eadbald (II, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_V'>5</ref>, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_VI'>6</ref>, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_IX'>9</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>et saep.</hi>).
Eanfled's mother was the sister of Eadbald, the Kentish princess
Ethelberg (<q>Tata</q>), wife of Edwin (II, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_IX'>9</ref>, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XI'>11</ref>, <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XX'>20</ref>).</note> who was her uncle's
son, requesting that he would send him to Rome in an
honourable manner. At that time, Honorius,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_II_Chap_XVIII'>II, 18</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et saep.</hi></note> one of the
disciples of the blessed Pope Gregory, a man very highly
instructed in ecclesiastical learning, was archbishop
there. When he had tarried there for a space, and,
being a youth of an active spirit, was diligently applying
himself to learn those things which came under his
notice, another youth, called Biscop, surnamed Benedict,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVIII'>IV, 18</ref>, and note.</note>
of the English nobility, arrived there, being likewise
desirous to go to Rome, of whom we have before made
mention.
</p>

<p>
The king gave him Wilfrid for a companion, and bade
Wilfrid conduct him to Rome. When they came to
Lyons, Wilfrid was detained there by Dalfinus,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXV'>III, 25</ref>. Annemundus was the name of the Archbishop.
Dalfinus, Count of Lyons, was his brother. Eddius makes the same
mistake.</note> the
bishop of that city; but Benedict hastened on to Rome.
For the bishop was delighted with the youth's prudent
discourse, the grace of his comely countenance, his eager
activity, and the consistency and maturity of his thoughts;
for which reason he plentifully supplied him and his
companions with all necessaries, as long as they stayed
with him; and further offered, if he would have it, to
commit to him the government of no small part of Gaul,
to give him a maiden daughter of his own brother<note place='foot'>A daughter of the Count.</note> to
wife, and to regard him always as his adopted son. But
Wilfrid thanked him for the loving-kindness which he was
pleased to show to a stranger, and answered, that he
had resolved upon another course of life, and for that
reason had left his country and set out for Rome.
</p>

<p>
Hereupon the bishop sent him to Rome, furnishing
him with a guide and supplying plenty of all things
requisite for his journey, earnestly requesting that he
would come that way, when he returned into his own
<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>
country. Wilfrid arriving at Rome, and daily giving
himself with all earnestness to prayer and the study of
ecclesiastical matters, as he had purposed in his mind,
gained the friendship of the most holy and learned Boniface,
the archdeacon,<note place='foot'>He presented Wilfrid to the Pope, Eugenius I. A leaden
<q>bulla</q> with the name of Boniface, Archdeacon, inscribed upon it
was found at Whitby not long ago.</note> who was also counsellor to the
Apostolic Pope, by whose instruction he learned in their
order the four Gospels, and the true computation of Easter;
and many other things appertaining to ecclesiastical
discipline, which he could not learn in his own country,
he acquired from the teaching of that same master.
When he had spent some months there, in successful
study, he returned into Gaul, to Dalfinus;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, to Annemundus.</note> and having
stayed with him three years, received from him the
tonsure, and Dalfinus esteemed him so highly in love
that he had thoughts of making him his heir; but this
was prevented by the bishop's cruel death, and Wilfrid
was reserved to be a bishop of his own, that is, the
English, nation. For Queen Baldhild<note place='foot'>This seems to be another mistake in which Bede follows
Eddius. It was probably Ebroin (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_I'>IV, 1</ref>, note), Mayor of the
Palace to her infant son Clothaire III, who put Annemundus to
death. Baldhild was, however, regent at the time. Eddius calls
her a Jezebel, but all that we know of her shows her to have been
a most pious and charitable lady, and she has been canonized by
the Church. She was especially active in her efforts to stop the
traffic in slaves. She herself, though she is said to have been of
noble English birth, had been sold as a slave into Gaul. She was
married first to Ercinwald, Mayor of the Palace, the predecessor
of Ebroin (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIX'>III, 19</ref>), and afterwards to Clovis II, King of Neustria
and Burgundy, 638-656. Baldhild ended her life in the monastery
of Chelles (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VIII'>III, 8</ref>, and note).</note> sent soldiers
with orders to put the bishop to death; whom Wilfrid,
as his clerk, attended to the place where he was to be
beheaded, being very desirous, though the bishop
strongly opposed it, to die with him; but the executioners,
understanding that he was a stranger, and of
the English nation, spared him, and would not put him
to death with his bishop.
</p>

<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>

<p>
Returning to Britain, he won the friendship of King
Alchfrid,<note place='foot'>III, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIV'>14</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXI'>21</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIV'>24</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXV'>25</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XVIII'>28</ref>. He was a friend of Coinwalch of
Wessex, from whom, as Eddius says, he learned to love the
Roman rules.</note> who had learnt to follow always and love the
catholic rules of the Church; and therefore finding him
to be a Catholic, he gave him presently land of ten
families at the place called Stanford;<note place='foot'>Possibly Stamford, in Lincolnshire; more probably, since the
land belonged to Alchfrid, Stamford Bridge, on the Derwent, in
Yorkshire.</note> and not long after,
the monastery, with land of thirty families, at the place
called Inhrypum;<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXV'>III, 25</ref>, where the extent is given as forty families, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
<q>hides.</q></note> which place he had formerly given to
those that followed the doctrine of the Scots, to build a
monastery there. But, forasmuch as they afterwards,
being given the choice, had rather quit the place than
adopt the Catholic Easter and other canonical rites,
according to the custom of the Roman Apostolic Church,
he gave the same to him whom he found to be instructed
in better discipline and better customs.
</p>

<p>
At the same time, by the said king's command, he was
ordained priest in the same monastery, by Agilbert,<note place='foot'>Cf. III, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VII'>7</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXV'>25</ref>, <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVIII'>28</ref>; IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_I'>1</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>12</ref>. For the Gewissae, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_II_Chap_V'>II, 5</ref> and
note.</note>
bishop of the Gewissae above-mentioned, the king being
desirous that a man of so much learning and piety
should attend him constantly as his special priest and
teacher; and not long after, when the Scottish sect
had been exposed and banished,<note place='foot'>At the synod of Whitby, 664 (<ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXV'>III, 25</ref>).</note> as was said above,
he, with the advice and consent of his father Oswy,
sent him into Gaul, to be consecrated as his bishop,<note place='foot'>Tuda (<ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVI'>III, 26</ref>) had died of the plague of 664. For Wilfrid's
consecration, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVIII'>III, 28</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi>, and note. Agilbert was not
Bishop of Paris till 666 (cf. III, 25, p. <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, note).</note>
when he was about thirty years of age, the same
Agilbert being then bishop of the city of Paris. Eleven
other bishops met at the consecration of the new bishop,
and that function was most honourably performed.
Whilst he yet tarried beyond the sea, the holy man,
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
Ceadda,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVIII'>III, 28</ref>, and note. Wilfrid did not return to Britain till 666.
Bede omits the story of his shipwreck on the coast of Sussex, and
says nothing of the three years spent as Abbot of Ripon, whither
he retired on finding Ceadda installed in his place. During this
time he acted occasionally as Bishop for Mercia, where the see
was vacant by the death of Jaruman in 667, and for Kent, during
part of the vacancy between the death of Deusdedit in 664 and
Theodore's arrival in 669.</note> was consecrated bishop of York<note place='foot'>The same Witan which elected Wilfrid decided to transfer the
Northumbrian see from Lindisfarne back to York, where Paulinus
had originally established it.</note> by command
of King Oswy, as has been said above; and
having nobly ruled that church three years, he retired
to take charge of his monastery of Laestingaeu, and
Wilfrid was made bishop of all the province of the
Northumbrians.
</p>

<p>
Afterwards, in the reign of Egfrid, he was expelled
from his bishopric, and others were consecrated bishops
in his stead, of whom mention has been made above.<note place='foot'>In 678, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>IV, 12</ref>, and note. Bede passes over nine years of
ceaseless activity in the diocese. It was during this time that
Wilfrid built his great churches.</note>
Designing to go to Rome, to plead his cause before the
Apostolic Pope, he took ship, and was driven by a west
wind into Frisland,<note place='foot'>Eddius says that he went there by his own wish. This is not
the occasion referred to in <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIII'>III, 13</ref> (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> note, <hi rend='italic'>ad loc.</hi>). Ebroin, from
motives of private enmity (Wilfrid had helped his enemy, Dagobert
II of Austrasia), attempted to bribe Aldgils to kill or surrender
Wilfrid, but his offer was indignantly rejected.</note> and honourably received by that
barbarous people and their King Aldgils, to whom he
preached Christ, and he instructed many thousands of
them in the Word of truth, washing them from the defilement
of their sins in the Saviour's font. Thus he began
there the work of the Gospel which was afterwards
finished with great devotion by the most reverend
bishop of Christ, Wilbrord.<note place='foot'>Cc. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_X'>10</ref>, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XI'>11</ref>; cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIII'>III, 13</ref>.</note> Having spent the winter
there successfully among this new people of God, he set
out again on his way to Rome,<note place='foot'>On the way he visited Dagobert II of Austrasia, and Perctarit,
king of the Lombards.</note> where his cause being
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
tried before Pope Agatho and many bishops,<note place='foot'>At a council of fifty bishops held in the Lateran in 679. Theodore
had sent documents stating his side of the case in charge of
a monk named Coenwald. For Agatho, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVIII'>IV, 18</ref>. The decision
was that Wilfrid should be reinstated in his bishopric and the
intruding bishops removed, but that afterwards he should appoint
coadjutors who should be consecrated by the Archbishop.</note> he was by
the judgement of them all acquitted of all blame, and
declared worthy of his bishopric.
</p>

<p>
At the same time, the said Pope Agatho assembling a
synod at Rome, of one hundred and twenty-five bishops,
against those who asserted that there was only one will
and operation in our Lord and Saviour,<note place='foot'>This council was held in 680 in preparation for the Council at
Constantinople in 680-681, against the Monothelites (cf. IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVII'>17</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVIII'>18</ref>,
and notes).</note> ordered Wilfrid
also to be summoned, and, sitting among the bishops, to
declare his own faith and the faith of the province or
island whence he came; and he and his people being found
orthodox in their faith, it was thought fit to record the
same among the acts of that synod, which was done in
in this manner: <q>Wilfrid, the beloved of God, bishop of
the city of York, appealing to the Apostolic see, and
being by that authority acquitted of every thing, whether
specified against him or not, and being appointed to sit
in judgement with one hundred and twenty-five other
bishops in the synod, made confession of the true and
catholic faith, and confirmed the same with his subscription
in the name of all the northern part of Britain and
Ireland, and the islands inhabited by the nations of the
English and Britons, as also by the Scots and Picts.</q>
</p>

<p>
After this, returning into Britain,<note place='foot'>In 680. Here Bede strangely omits important events. On
Wilfrid's return to Northumbria he was accused of having procured
his acquittal by bribery and was imprisoned for nine months,
first at Bromnis (unidentified) and then at Dunbar. Being released
at the request of Aebba, Abbess of Coldingham (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIX'>19</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXV'>25</ref>), who
was Egfrid's aunt, he went first to Mercia and then to Wessex,
but was expelled from both provinces. Egfrid's sister Osthryth
was the wife of Ethelred of Mercia, and in Wessex the king,
Centwine, had married a sister of the Northumbrian queen,
Eormenburg.</note> he converted the
province of the South Saxons from their idolatrous
<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>
worship to the faith of Christ.<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIII'>IV, 13</ref>.</note> He also sent ministers of
the Word to the Isle of Wight;<note place='foot'>IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIII'>13</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVI'>16</ref>. His connection with Caedwalla of Wessex is to
be placed here (<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVI'>IV, 16</ref>).</note> and in the second year
of Aldfrid, who reigned after Egfrid, was restored to his
see and bishopric by that king's invitation.<note place='foot'>In 686 he was restored to the bishopric of York and the
monastery of Ripon. The diocese over which he was now placed
was greatly circumscribed. Lindsey and Abercorn, besides having
been detached by the subdivision, had both ceased to belong to
Northumbria; Lindisfarne and Hexham were separate bishoprics
and were merely administered by Wilfrid till the appointment of
Eadbert to Lindisfarne and of John to Hexham. The restoration
of Wilfrid was brought about by Theodore who had become
reconciled to him and induced Aldfrid to allow him to be reinstated.</note> Nevertheless,
five years after, being again accused, he was deprived of
his bishopric by the same king and certain bishops.<note place='foot'>This was his second expulsion, in 691. Dissensions had arisen
about various matters. The most important were the attempt, resisted
by Wilfrid, to form Ripon into a separate see, and the
requirement that he should accept the decrees of Theodore of 678.
To accept these would have been equivalent to a rejection of the
Pope's judgement in his case.</note>
Coming to Rome,<note place='foot'>Bede omits here Wilfrid's second sojourn in Mercia (eleven
years), when he acted temporarily as Bishop of the Middle English
(he alludes to it in <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIII'>IV, 23</ref>), and the great Council, representative
of the whole English Church, summoned by Aldfrid in 702 and held
at a place in Northumbria (unidentified; possibly Austerfield in
the West Riding of Yorkshire) called by Eddius <q>Ouestraefelda</q>
and <q>Aetswinapathe</q> (supposed to mean <q>at the swine's path,</q> or
<q>Edwinspath</q>). At this Council Wilfrid was excommunicated and
deprived of all his possessions except the monastery of Ripon. He
appealed again to the Apostolic see and returned to Mercia.
Probably in the following year he set out for Rome, visiting Wilbrord
in Frisia by the way (cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIII'>III, 13</ref>).</note> he was allowed to make his defence
in the presence of his accusers, before a number of
bishops and the Apostolic Pope John.<note place='foot'>John VI, 701-705. Bertwald had sent envoys to represent
Wilfrid's opponents. The investigation took four months, during
which seventy sittings of the Council were held.</note> It was shown
by the judgement of them all, that his accusers had in
part laid false accusations to his charge; and the aforesaid
Pope wrote to the kings of the English, Ethelred
<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>
and Aldfrid, to cause him to be restored to his bishopric,
because he had been unjustly condemned.<note place='foot'>Bertwald was admonished to hold a synod and come to an
agreement with Wilfrid. In the event of failure, both parties were
to appear in Rome. The letter is cautious and conciliatory in tone.</note>
</p>

<p>
His acquittal was much forwarded by the reading of
the acts of the synod of Pope Agatho,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>.</note> of blessed memory,
which had been formerly held, when Wilfrid was in Rome
and sat in council among the bishops, as has been said
before. For the acts of that synod being, as the case
required, read, by order of the Apostolic Pope, before the
nobility and a great number of the people for some days,
they came to the place where it was written, <q>Wilfrid,
the beloved of God, bishop of the city of York, appealing
to the Apostolic see, and being by that authority acquitted
of everything, whether specified against him or
not,</q> and the rest as above stated. This being read,
the hearers were amazed, and the reader ceasing, they
began to ask of one another, who that Bishop Wilfrid
was. Then Boniface, the Pope's counsellor,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>.</note> and many
others, who had seen him there in the days of Pope
Agatho, said that he was the same bishop that lately came
to Rome, to be tried by the Apostolic see, being accused
by his people, and <q>who, said they, having long since
come here upon the like accusation, the cause and contention
of both parties being heard and examined, was
proved by Pope Agatho, of blessed memory, to have
been wrongfully expelled from his bishopric, and was
held in such honour by him, that he commanded him to
sit in the council of bishops which he had assembled,
as a man of untainted faith and an upright mind.</q>
This being heard, the Pope and all the rest said, that
a man of so great authority, who had held the office
of a bishop for nearly forty years, ought by no means to
be condemned, but being altogether cleared of the faults
laid to his charge, should return home with honour.
</p>

<p>
When he came to Gaul, on his way back to Britain, on
a sudden he fell sick, and the sickness increasing, he was
so weighed down by it, that he could not ride, but was
<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
carried in his bed by the hands of his servants. Being
thus come to the city of Maeldum,<note place='foot'>Meaux, cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_I'>IV, 1</ref> (Meldi).</note> in Gaul, he lay four
days and nights, as if he had been dead, and only by his
faint breathing showed that he had any life in him.
Having continued thus four days, without meat or drink,
without speech or hearing, at length, on the fifth day, at
daybreak, as it were awakening out of a deep sleep, he
raised himself and sat up, and opening his eyes, saw
round about him a company of brethren singing psalms
and weeping. Sighing gently, he asked where Acca,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIII'>III, 13</ref>, and note; <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XX'>20</ref>.</note>
the priest, was. This man, straightway being called,
came in, and seeing him somewhat recovered and able
to speak, knelt down, and gave thanks to God, with all
the brethren there present. When they had sat awhile
and begun to discourse, with great awe, of the judgements
of heaven, the bishop bade the rest go out for a
time, and spoke to the priest, Acca, after this manner:
</p>

<p>
<q>A dread vision has even now appeared to me, which
I would have you hear and keep secret, till I know what
God will please to do with me. There stood by me a
certain one, glorious in white raiment, and he told me
that he was Michael, the Archangel, and said, <q>I am
sent to call you back from death: for the Lord has
granted you life, through the prayers and tears of your
disciples and brethren, and the intercession of His Blessed
Mother Mary, of perpetual virginity; wherefore I tell
you, that you shall now recover from this sickness; but
be ready, for I will return and visit you at the end of four
years. And when you come into your country, you shall
recover the greater part of the possessions that have
been taken from you, and shall end your days in peace
and quiet.</q></q> The bishop accordingly recovered, whereat
all men rejoiced and gave thanks to God, and setting
forward on his journey, he arrived in Britain.
</p>

<p>
Having read the letters which he brought from the
Apostolic Pope, Bertwald, the archbishop, and Ethelred,<note place='foot'>Ethelred of Mercia had resigned his throne and was now Abbot
of Bardney; cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XI'>III, 11</ref>, and IV, 12, p. <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, note.</note>
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
sometime king, but then abbot, readily took his part; for
the said Ethelred, calling to him Coenred,<note place='foot'>Cc. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIII'>13</ref> and <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>19</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi>; cf. c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>.</note> whom he had
made king in his own stead, begged him to be friends
with Wilfrid, in which request he prevailed; nevertheless
Aldfrid, king of the Northumbrians, disdained to receive
him. But he died soon after,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>18</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi> He received his envoys courteously, but
refused to alter his decision for any <q>alleged writings from the
Apostolic see.</q> But Eddius says he repented on his deathbed.</note> and so it came to pass that,
during the reign of his son Osred,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note> when a synod was
assembled before long by the river Nidd,<note place='foot'>In 705. It was a Northumbrian council, not, like Estrefeld,
representative of the whole Church. Bertwald was present and
adopted a conciliatory line.</note> after some
contention on both sides, at length, by the consent of
all, he was restored to the government of his own church;<note place='foot'>He was restored only to Hexham and to his monastery at
Ripon. Bishop John, on the death of Bosa about this time, was
transferred to York; <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_III'>3</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi></note>
and thus he lived in peace four years, till the day of his
death. He died in his monastery, which he had in the
province of Undalum,<note place='foot'>Oundle, <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> p. <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, note 4.</note> under the government of the
Abbot Cuthbald;<note place='foot'>Or Cudwald. A Cuthbald succeeded Sexwulf (<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_VI'>IV, 6</ref>) as Abbot
at Medeshamstead. He is, perhaps, identical with the Abbot of
Oundle.</note> and by the ministry of the brethren,
he was carried to his first monastery which is called
Inhrypum,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, and <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXV'>III, 25</ref>.</note> and buried in the church of the blessed
Apostle Peter, hard by the altar on the south side, as has
been mentioned above, and this epitaph was written over
him:
</p>

<p>
<q>Here rests the body of the great Bishop Wilfrid,
who, for love of piety, built these courts and consecrated
them with the noble name of Peter, to whom Christ, the
Judge of all the earth, gave the keys of Heaven. And
devoutly he clothed them with gold and Tyrian purple;
yea, and he placed here the trophy of the Cross, of
shining ore, uplifted high; moreover he caused the four
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
books of the Gospel to be written in gold in their order,
and he gave a case meet for them of ruddy gold. And
he also brought the holy season of Easter, returning in
its course, to accord with the true teaching of the
catholic rule which the Fathers fixed, and, banishing all
doubt and error, gave his nation sure guidance in their
worship. And in this place he gathered a great throng
of monks, and with all diligence safeguarded the precepts
which the Fathers' rule enjoined. And long time
sore vexed by many a peril at home and abroad, when he
had held the office of a bishop forty-five years, he passed
away and with joy departed to the heavenly kingdom.
Grant, O Jesus, that the flock may follow in the path of
the shepherd.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_V_Chap_XX'/>
<head>Chap. XX. How Albinus succeeded to the godly Abbot
Hadrian, and Acca to Bishop Wilfrid. [709 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
The next year after the death of the aforesaid father,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi> 710. But Hadrian left Rome in 668 (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_I'>IV, 1</ref>), and Bede
says he died forty-one years after that event. This would be in 709.</note>
which was the fifth year of King Osred, the most
reverend father, Abbot Hadrian,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Preface'>Preface</ref> and <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_I'>IV, 1</ref>.</note> fellow labourer in the
Word of God with Bishop Theodore<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note> of blessed memory,
died, and was buried in the church of the Blessed Mother
of God, in his own monastery,<note place='foot'>St. Augustine's, Canterbury; cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_I'>IV, 1</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi></note> this being the forty-first
year after he was sent by Pope Vitalian with Theodore,
and the thirty-ninth after his arrival in England. Among
other proofs of his learning, as well as Theodore's, there
is this testimony, that Albinus,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Preface'>Preface</ref> and note.</note> his disciple, who succeeded
him in the government of his monastery, was so
well instructed in literary studies, that he had no small
knowledge of the Greek tongue, and knew the Latin
as well as the English, which was his native language.
</p>

<p>
Acca,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIII'>III, 13</ref>, and note.</note> his priest, succeeded Wilfrid in the bishopric of
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
the church of Hagustald, being likewise a man of zeal
and great in noble works in the sight of God and man.
He enriched the structure of his church, which is dedicated
in honour of the blessed Apostle Andrew with
manifold adornments and marvellous workmanship. For
he gave all diligence, as he does to this day, to procure
relics of the blessed Apostles and martyrs of Christ from
all parts, and to raise altars in their honour in separate
side-chapels built for the purpose within the walls of the
same church. Besides which, he industriously gathered
the histories of their martyrdom, together with other
ecclesiastical writings, and erected there a large and
noble library. He likewise carefully provided holy vessels,
lamps, and other such things as appertain to the adorning
of the house of God. He in like manner invited to
him a notable singer called Maban,<note place='foot'>A.S. version: Mafa. For the Roman style of Church music,
cf. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_XX'>II, 20</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi></note> who had been
taught to sing by the successors of the disciples of the
blessed Pope Gregory in Kent, to instruct himself and
his clergy, and kept him twelve years, to the end that he
might teach such Church music as they did not know,
and by his teaching restore to its former state that which
was corrupted either by long use, or through neglect.
For Bishop Acca himself was a most skilful singer, as
well as most learned in Holy Writ, sound in the confession
of the catholic faith, and well versed in the rules of
ecclesiastical custom; nor does he cease to walk after
this manner, till he receive the rewards of his pious devotion.
For he was brought up from boyhood and instructed
among the clergy of the most holy and beloved
of God, Bosa, bishop of York.<note place='foot'>IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>12</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_III'>V, 3</ref>.</note> Afterwards, coming to
Bishop Wilfrid in the hope of a better plan of life, he
spent the rest of his days in attendance on him till that
bishop's death, and going with him to Rome, learned
there many profitable things concerning the ordinances
of the Holy Church, which he could not have learned in
his own country.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_V_Chap_XXI'/>
<head>Chap. XXI. How the Abbot Ceolfrid sent master-builders
to the King of the Picts to build a church, and with
them an epistle concerning the Catholic Easter and the
Tonsure. [710 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
At that time,<note place='foot'>In 710. Naiton, or Nechtan mac Derili, succeeded in 706. The
northern Picts had received Christianity through Columba (<ref target='Book_III_Chap_IV'>III, 4</ref>).
Naiton is said to have been converted to Roman usages by a missionary
named Boniface, who was probably an Irishman, St. Cuiritin.
Naiton did not succeed in forcing all his people to adopt
them, but in 717 he expelled the Columban clergy who refused to
conform.</note> Naiton, King of the Picts, who inhabit
the northern parts of Britain, taught by frequent meditation
on the ecclesiastical writings, renounced the error
whereby he and his nation had been holden till then,
touching the observance of Easter, and brought himself
and all his people to celebrate the catholic time of our
Lord's Resurrection. To the end that he might bring this
to pass with the more ease and greater authority, he
sought aid from the English, whom he knew to have
long since framed their religion after the example of the
holy Roman Apostolic Church. Accordingly, he sent
messengers to the venerable Ceolfrid,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVIII'>IV, 18</ref> and note.</note> abbot of the monastery
of the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul, which
stands at the mouth of the river Wear, and near the
river Tyne, at the place called Ingyruum,<note place='foot'>Wearmouth (<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>) and Jarrow, Bede's own monastery (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi>,
c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>). Though they were some distance apart, Wearmouth and
Jarrow formed together one monastery.</note> which he
gloriously governed after Benedict,<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVIII'>IV, 18</ref>.</note> of whom we have
before spoken; desiring, that he would send him a letter
of exhortation, by the help of which he might the better
confute those that presumed to keep Easter out of the
due time; as also concerning the form and manner of
tonsure whereby the clergy should be distinguished,<note place='foot'>II, 2, p. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, note.</note>
notwithstanding that he himself had no small knowledge
of these things. He also prayed to have master-builders
sent him to build a church of stone in his nation after
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>
the Roman manner,<note place='foot'>Wood being the usual material, cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_IV'>III, 4</ref>, <q>Candida Casa.</q>
The locality of the church is not known. Rosemarkie, on the
Moray Frith, and, more probably, Restennet, near Forfar, have
been suggested.</note> promising to dedicate the same in
honour of the blessed chief of the Apostles. Moreover,
he and all his people, he said, would always follow the
custom of the holy Roman Apostolic Church, in so far as
men so distant from the speech and nation of the Romans
could learn it. The most reverend Abbot Ceolfrid favourably
receiving his godly desires and requests, sent the
builders he desired, and likewise the following letter:<note place='foot'>The letter has been supposed to have been written by Bede
himself.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>To the most excellent lord, and glorious King Naiton,
Abbot Ceolfrid, greeting in the Lord.</hi> We most readily
and willingly endeavour, according to your desire, to
make known to you the catholic observance of holy
Easter, according to what we have learned of the Apostolic
see, even as you, most devout king, in your godly
zeal, have requested of us. For we know, that whensoever
the lords of this world labour to learn, and to teach
and to guard the truth, it is a gift of God to his Holy
Church. For a certain profane writer<note place='foot'>Plato, Rep. 473, D.</note> has most truly said,
that the world would be most happy if either kings were
philosophers, or philosophers were kings. Now if a man
of this world could judge truly of the philosophy of this
world, and form a right choice concerning the state of
this world, how much more is it to be desired, and most
earnestly to be prayed for by such as are citizens of the
heavenly country, and strangers and pilgrims in this
world, that the more powerful any are in the world the
more they may strive to hearken to the commands of Him
who is the Supreme Judge, and by their example and
authority may teach those that are committed to their
charge, to keep the same, together with themselves.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>There are then three rules given in the Sacred
Writings, whereby the time of keeping Easter has been
appointed for us and may in no wise be changed by any
authority of man; two whereof are divinely established
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
in the law of Moses; the third is added in the Gospel by
reason of the Passion and Resurrection of our Lord. For
the law enjoined, that the Passover should be kept in the
first month of the year, and the third week of that
month, that is, from the fifteenth day to the one-and-twentieth.
It is added, by Apostolic institution, from the
Gospel, that we are to wait for the Lord's day in that
third week, and to keep the beginning of the Paschal
season on the same. Which threefold rule whosoever
shall rightly observe, will never err in fixing the Paschal
feast. But if you desire to be more plainly and fully informed
in all these particulars, it is written in Exodus,
where the people of Israel, being about to be delivered
out of Egypt, are commanded to keep the first Passover,<note place='foot'>Exod., xii, 1-3. (The quotations are from the Vulgate.)</note>
that the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron, saying,
<q>This month shall be unto you the beginning of months;
it shall be the first month of the year to you. Speak ye
unto all the congregation of Israel, saying, In the tenth
day of this month they shall take to them every man a
lamb, according to the house of their fathers, a lamb for
an house.</q> And a little after,<note place='foot'>Exod., xii, 6.</note> <q>And ye shall keep it up
until the fourteenth day of the same month; and the
whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill it
in the evening.</q> By which words it most plainly appears,
that in the Paschal observance, though mention is made
of the fourteenth day, yet it is not commanded that the
Passover be kept on that day; but on the evening of the
fourteenth day, that is, when the fifteenth moon, which
is the beginning of the third week, appears in the sky, it
is commanded that the lamb be killed; and that it was
the night of the fifteenth moon, when the Egyptians
were smitten and Israel was redeemed from long captivity.
He says,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, xii, 15.</note> <q>Seven days shall ye eat unleavened
bread.</q> By which words all the third week of that same
first month is appointed to be a solemn feast. But lest
we should think that those same seven days were to be
reckoned from the fourteenth to the twentieth, He forthwith
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
adds,<note place='foot'>Exod., xii, 15.</note> <q>Even the first day ye shall put away leaven
out of your houses; for whosoever eateth leavened bread,
from the first day until the seventh day, that soul shall
be cut off from Israel;</q> and so on, till he says,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, xii, 17.</note> <q>For in
this selfsame day I will bring your army out of the
land of Egypt.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Thus he calls that the first day of unleavened bread,
in which he was to bring their army out of Egypt. Now
it is evident, that they were not brought out of Egypt
on the fourteenth day, in the evening whereof the lamb
was killed, and which is properly called the Passover or
Phase, but on the fifteenth day, as is most plainly written
in the book of Numbers:<note place='foot'>Numbers, xxxiii, 13.</note> <q>and they departed from
Rameses on the fifteenth day of the first month, on the
morrow after the Passover the Israelites went out with
an high hand.</q> Thus the seven days of unleavened bread,
on the first whereof the people of the Lord were brought
out of Egypt, are to be reckoned from the beginning of
the third week, as has been said, that is, from the fifteenth
day of the first month, till the end of the one-and-twentieth
of the same month. But the fourteenth day is named
apart from this number, by the title of the Passover, as
is plainly shown by that which follows in Exodus:<note place='foot'>Exod., xii, 17-19.</note>
where, after it is said, <q>For in this self-same day I will
bring your army out of the land of Egypt;</q> it is forthwith
added, <q>And ye shall observe this day in your generations
by an ordinance for ever. In the first month,
on the fourteenth day of the month, ye shall eat unleavened
bread, until the one-and-twentieth day of the
month at even. Seven days shall there be no leaven
found in your houses.</q> Now, who is there that does not
perceive, that there are not only seven days, but rather
eight, from the fourteenth to the one-and-twentieth, if
the fourteenth be also reckoned in the number? But if,
as appears by diligent study of the truth of the Scriptures,
we reckon from the evening of the fourteenth day
to the evening of the one-and-twentieth, we shall certainly
<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>
find, that, while the Paschal feast begins on the
evening of the fourteenth day, yet the whole sacred
solemnity contains no more than only seven nights and
as many days. Wherefore the rule which we laid down
is proved to be true, when we said that the Paschal
season is to be celebrated in the first month of the year,
and the third week of the same. For it is in truth the
third week, because it begins on the evening of the
fourteenth day, and ends on the evening of the one-and-twentieth.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But since Christ our Passover is sacrificed,<note place='foot'>1 Cor., v, 7.</note> and has
made the Lord's day, which among the ancients was
called the first day of the week, a solemn day to us for
the joy of His Resurrection, the Apostolic tradition has
included it in the Paschal festival; yet has decreed that
the time of the legal Passover be in no wise anticipated
or diminished; but rather ordains, that according to the
precept of the law, that same first month of the year,
and the fourteenth day of the same, and the evening
thereof be awaited. And when this day should chance
to fall on a Saturday, every man should take to him a
lamb, according to the house of his fathers, a lamb for
an house, and he should kill it in the evening, that is,
that all the Churches throughout the world, making one
Catholic Church, should provide Bread and Wine for the
Mystery of the Flesh and Blood of the spotless Lamb
<q>that hath taken away the sins of the world;</q><note place='foot'>St. John, i, 29.</note> and after
a fitting solemn service of lessons and prayers and Paschal
ceremonies, they should offer up these to the Lord, in
hope of redemption to come. For this is that same night
in which the people of Israel were delivered out of Egypt
by the blood of the lamb; this is the same in which all
the people of God were, by Christ's Resurrection, set free
from eternal death. Then, in the morning, when the
Lord's day dawns, they should celebrate the first day of
the Paschal festival; for that is the day on which our
Lord made known the glory of His Resurrection to His
disciples, to their manifold joy at the merciful revelation.
<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>
The same is the first day of unleavened bread, concerning
which it is plainly written in Leviticus,<note place='foot'>Levit., xxiii, 5-7.</note> <q>In the
fourteenth day of the first month, at even, is the Lord's
Passover. And on the fifteenth day of the same month
is the feast of unleavened bread unto the Lord; seven
days ye must eat unleavened bread. In the first day ye
shall have an holy convocation.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>If therefore it could be that the Lord's day should
always happen on the fifteenth day of the first month,
that is, on the fifteenth moon, we might always celebrate
the Passover at one and the same time with the ancient
people of God, though the nature of the mystery be
different, as we do it with one and the same faith. But
inasmuch as the day of the week does not keep pace
exactly with the moon, the Apostolic tradition, which
was preached at Rome by the blessed Peter, and confirmed
at Alexandria by Mark the Evangelist,<note place='foot'>Cf. Bede's <q>Expositio in Marci Evangelium</q> (Opp. X, 2),
where he says that St. Mark founded the Church in Alexandria,
and taught the canonical observance of Easter; and Opp. VI, 235
(De Temp. Rat.).</note> his interpreter,
appointed that when the first month was come,
and in it the evening of the fourteenth day, we should
also wait for the Lord's day, between the fifteenth and the
one-and-twentieth day of the same month. For on whichever
of those days it shall fall, Easter will be rightly kept
on the same; seeing that it is one of those seven days
on which the feast of unleavened bread is commanded to
be kept. Thus it comes to pass that our Easter never
falls either before or after the third week of the first
month, but has for its observance either the whole of it,
to wit, the seven days of unleavened bread appointed by
the law, or at least some of them. For though it comprises
but one of them, that is, the seventh, which the
Scripture so highly commends, saying,<note place='foot'>Levit., xxiii, 8.</note> <q>But the seventh
day shall be a more holy convocation, ye shall do no
servile work therein,</q> none can lay it to our charge, that
we do not rightly keep Easter Sunday, which we received
<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>
from the Gospel, in the third week of the first
month, as the Law prescribes.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The catholic reason of this observance being thus
explained, the unreasonable error, on the other hand, of
those who, without any necessity, presume either to anticipate,
or to go beyond the term appointed in the Law,
is manifest. For they that think Easter Sunday is to be
observed from the fourteenth day of the first month till
the twentieth moon, anticipate the time prescribed in
the law, without any necessary reason; for when they
begin to celebrate the vigil of the holy night from the
evening of the thirteenth day, it is plain that they make
that day the beginning of their Easter, whereof they find
no mention in the commandment of the Law; and when
they avoid celebrating our Lord's Easter on the one-and-twentieth
day of the month, it is surely manifest that they
wholly exclude that day from their solemnity, which the
Law many times commends to be observed as a greater
festival than the rest; and thus, perverting the proper
order, they sometimes keep Easter Day entirely in the
second week, and never place it on the seventh day of
the third week. And again, they who think that Easter
is to be kept from the sixteenth day of the said month
till the two-and-twentieth<note place='foot'>This was an error of the Latins in the fifth century. The
object was to make it possible for Good Friday to fall on the fourteenth
of the month Nisan, which they believed to be the actual
day of the Crucifixion, and to keep Easter Day entirely clear of
the Jewish festival.</note> no less erroneously, though
on the other side, deviate from the right way of truth,
and as it were avoiding shipwreck on Scylla, they fall
into the whirlpool of Charybdis to be drowned. For when
they teach that Easter is to be begun at the rising of the
sixteenth moon of the first month, that is, from the evening
of the fifteenth day, it is certain that they altogether
exclude from their solemnity the fourteenth day of the
same month, which the Law first and chiefly commends;
so that they scarce touch the evening of the fifteenth
day, on which the people of God were redeemed from
Egyptian bondage, and on which our Lord, by His Blood,
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
rescued the world from the darkness of sin, and on which
being also buried, He gave us the hope of a blessed rest
after death.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And these men, receiving in themselves the recompense
of their error, when they place Easter Sunday on
the twenty-second day of the month, openly transgress
and do violence to the term of Easter appointed by the
Law, seeing that they begin Easter on the evening of
that day in which the Law commanded it to be completed
and brought to an end; and appoint that to be
the first day of Easter, whereof no mention is any where
found in the Law, to wit, the first of the fourth week.
And both sorts are mistaken, not only in fixing and computing
the moon's age, but also sometimes in finding the
first month; but this controversy is longer than can be
or ought to be contained in this letter. I will only say
thus much, that by the vernal equinox, it may always be
found, without the chance of an error, which must be
the first month of the year, according to the lunar computation,
and which the last. But the equinox, according
to the opinion of all the Eastern nations, and particularly
of the Egyptians,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi> Alexandrians.</note> who surpass all other learned
men in calculation, falls on the twenty-first day of March,
as we also prove by horological observation. Whatsoever
moon therefore is at the full before the equinox,
being on the fourteenth or fifteenth day, the same belongs
to the last month of the foregoing year, and consequently
is not meet for the celebration of Easter; but
that moon which is full after the equinox, or at the very
time of the equinox, belongs to the first month, and on
that day, without a doubt, we must understand that the
ancients were wont to celebrate the Passover; and that
we also ought to keep Easter when the Sunday comes.
And that this must be so, there is this cogent reason.
It is written in Genesis,<note place='foot'>Gen., i, 16.</note> <q>And God made two great
lights; the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser
light to rule the night.</q> Or, as another edition<note place='foot'>The Itala.</note> has it,
<q>The greater light to begin the day, and the lesser to
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
begin the night.</q> As, therefore, the sun, coming forth
from the midst of the east, fixed the vernal equinox by
his rising, and afterwards the moon at the full, when the
sun set in the evening, followed from the midst of the
east; so every year the same first lunar month must be
observed in the like order, so that its full moon must not
be before the equinox; but either on the very day of the
equinox, as it was in the beginning, or after it is past. But
if the full moon shall happen to be but one day before
the time of the equinox, the aforesaid reason proves
that such moon is not to be assigned to the first month
of the new year, but rather to the last of the preceding,
and that it is therefore not meet for the celebration of
the Paschal festival.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Now if it please you likewise to hear the mystical
reason in this matter, we are commanded to keep Easter
in the first month of the year, which is also called the
month of new things, because we ought to celebrate the
mysteries of our Lord's Resurrection and our deliverance,
with the spirit of our minds renewed to the love of
heavenly things. We are commanded to keep it in the
third week of the same month, because Christ Himself,
who had been promised before the Law, and under the
Law, came with grace, in the third age of the world, to
be sacrificed as our Passover; and because rising from
the dead the third day after the offering of His Passion,
He wished this to be called the Lord's day, and the
Paschal feast of His Resurrection to be yearly celebrated
on the same; because, also, we do then only truly celebrate
His solemn festival, if we endeavour with Him to keep
the Passover, that is, the passing from this world to the
Father, by faith, hope, and charity. We are commanded
to observe the full moon of the Paschal month after the
vernal equinox, to the end, that the sun may first make
the day longer than the night, and then the moon may
show to the world her full orb of light; inasmuch as first
<q>the Sun of righteousness, with healing in His wings,</q><note place='foot'>Mal., iv, 2.</note>
that is, our Lord Jesus, by the triumph of His Resurrection,
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
dispelled all the darkness of death, and so ascending
into Heaven, filled His Church, which is often signified
by the name of the moon, with the light of inward grace,
by sending down upon her His Spirit. Which order of
our salvation the prophet had in his mind, when he said
<q>The sun was exalted and the moon stood in her
order.</q></q><note place='foot'>Habak., iii, 11 (from the Itala).</note>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>He, therefore, who shall contend that the full Paschal
moon can happen before the equinox, disagrees with the
doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, in the celebration of the
greatest mysteries, and agrees with those who trust that
they may be saved without the grace of Christ preventing
them,<note place='foot'>The Pelagians; <ref target='Book_I_Chap_X'>I, 10</ref>, and note; cf. <ref target='Book_I_Chap_XVII'>I, 17</ref>.</note> and who presume to teach that they might
have attained to perfect righteousness, though the true
Light had never by death and resurrection vanquished
the darkness of the world. Thus, after the rising of the
sun at the equinox, and after the full moon of the first
month following in her order, that is, after the end of
the fourteenth day of the same month, all which we have
received by the Law to be observed, we still, as we are
taught in the Gospel, wait in the third week for the
Lord's day; and so, at length, we celebrate the offering
of our Easter solemnity, to show that we are not, with
the ancients, doing honour to the casting off of the yoke
of Egyptian bondage; but that, with devout faith and
love, we worship the Redemption of the whole world,
which having been prefigured in the deliverance of the
ancient people of God, was fulfilled in Christ's Resurrection,
and that we may signify that we rejoice in the sure
and certain hope of our own resurrection, which we believe
will likewise happen on the Lord's day.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Now this computation of Easter, which we set forth
to you to be followed, is contained in a cycle of nineteen
years, which began long since to be observed in the
Church, to wit, even in the time of the Apostles, especially
at Rome and in Egypt, as has been said above.<note place='foot'>The reference must be to p. 364, <q>the apostolic tradition.</q>
For the nineteen years' cycle, cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_III'>III, 3</ref> (Anatolius).</note>
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
But by the industry of Eusebius,<note place='foot'>The celebrated Bishop of Caesarea, called also Eusebius
Pamphili, a name which he adopted from devotion to his friend,
Pamphilus. How much he had to do with the nineteen years' cycle
seems altogether uncertain. He took a leading part in the Council
of Nicaea (325 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>), but there is no proof that the Council formally
adopted the cycle, as has been supposed. It had been in use long
before, but it may have received authoritative sanction at Nicaea.
Eusebius wrote a treatise on Easter, of which a fragment is extant.</note> who took his surname
from the blessed martyr Pamphilus,<note place='foot'>A presbyter of Caesarea, the founder of the famous library in
that place. He was martyred in 309 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> Eusebius wrote his life,
but the work is lost.</note> it was reduced to a
plainer system; insomuch that what till then used to be
enjoined every year throughout all the Churches by the
Bishop of Alexandria, might, from that time forward, be
most easily known by all men, the occurrence of the fourteenth
moon being regularly set forth in its course. This
Paschal computation, Theophilus,<note place='foot'>Archbishop of Alexandria, 385-412. He made a cycle of 418
years (19 × 22) for Theodosius, and reckoned the days on which
Easter would fall for 100 years from the first year of the consulate
of Theodosius (380 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>).</note> Bishop of Alexandria,
made for the Emperor Theodosius, for a hundred years
to come. Cyril<note place='foot'>The great Archbishop of Alexandria, 412-444. He shortened
the cycle of Theophilus, making a cycle of ninety-five years (19 × 5),
for the sake of convenience. Part of his <q>Computus Paschalis</q>
remains.</note> also, his successor, comprised a series
of ninety-five years in five cycles of nineteen years. After
whom, Dionysius Exiguus<note place='foot'>A monk of the Western Church in the sixth century. The
surname, <q>Exiguus,</q> refers, not to his stature, but to his humbleness
of heart. Our method of dating from the Birth of Christ was
begun by him. He revived the cycle of Victorius (or Victorinus)
of Aquitaine (463 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>), hence called Dionysian. It was a cycle of
532 years, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the lunar cycle of 19 × the solar cycle of 28.</note> added as many more, in
order, after the same manner, reaching down to our own
time. The expiration of these is now drawing near, but
there is at the present day so great a number of calculators,
that even in our Churches throughout Britain,
there are many who, having learned the ancient rules of
the Egyptians, can with great ease carry on the Paschal
cycles for any length of time, even to five hundred and
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
thirty-two years,<note place='foot'>Cf. p. <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>, note 5.</note> if they will; after the expiration of
which, all that appertains to the succession of sun and
moon, month and week, returns in the same order as
before. We therefore forbear to send you these same
cycles of the times to come, because, desiring only to be
instructed respecting the reason for the Paschal time,
you show that you have enough of those catholic cycles
concerning Easter.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But having said thus much briefly and succinctly, as
you required, concerning Easter, I also exhort you to
take heed that the tonsure, concerning which likewise
you desired me to write to you, be in accordance with
the use of the Church and the Christian Faith. And we
know indeed that the Apostles were not all shorn after
the same manner, nor does the Catholic Church now, as
it agrees in one faith, hope, and charity towards God,
use one and the same form of tonsure throughout the
world. Moreover, to look back to former times, to wit,
the times of the patriarchs, Job, the pattern of patience,
when tribulation came upon him, shaved his head,<note place='foot'>Job, i, 20.</note> and
thus made it appear that he had used, in time of prosperity,
to let his hair grow. But concerning Joseph, who
more than other men practised and taught chastity,
humility, piety, and the other virtues, we read that he
was shorn when he was to be delivered from bondage,<note place='foot'>Gen., xli, 14.</note>
by which it appears, that during the time of his bondage,
he was in the prison with unshorn hair. Behold then
how each of these men of God differed in the manner of
their appearance abroad, though their inward consciences
agreed in a like grace of virtue. But though we may be
free to confess, that the difference of tonsure is not
hurtful to those whose faith is pure towards God, and
their charity sincere towards their neighbour, especially
since we do not read that there was ever any controversy
among the Catholic fathers about the difference of tonsure,
as there has been a contention about the diversity
in keeping Easter, and in matters of faith; nevertheless,
among all the forms of tonsure that are to be found in
<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>
the Church, or among mankind at large, I think none
more meet to be followed and received by us than that
which that disciple wore on his head, to whom, after his
confession of Himself, our Lord said,<note place='foot'>St. Matt., xvi, 18.</note> <q>Thou art Peter,
and upon this rock I will build My Church, and the gates
of Hell shall not prevail against it, and I will give unto
thee the keys of the kingdom of Heaven.</q> Nor do I think
that any is more rightly to be abhorred and detested
by all the faithful, than that which that man used, to
whom that same Peter, when he would have bought the
grace of the Holy Ghost, said,<note place='foot'>Acts, viii, 20 (Vulgate). The origin of this form of tonsure was
attributed to Simon Magus.</note> <q>Thy money perish with
thee, because thou hast thought that the gift of God
may be purchased with money. Thou hast neither part
nor lot in this word.</q> Nor do we shave ourselves in the
form of a crown only because Peter was so shorn; but
because Peter was so shorn in memory of the Passion of
our Lord, therefore we also, who desire to be saved by
the same Passion, do with him bear the sign of the same
Passion on the top of our head, which is the highest part
of our body. For as all the Church, because it was made
a Church by the death of Him that gave it life, is wont
to bear the sign of His Holy Cross on the forehead, to
the end, that it may, by the constant protection of His
banner, be defended from the assaults of evil spirits, and
by the frequent admonition of the same be taught, in
like manner, to crucify the flesh with its affections and
lusts;<note place='foot'>Gal., v, 24.</note> so also it behoves those, who having either taken
the vows of a monk, or having the degree of a clerk, must
needs curb themselves the more strictly by continence,
for the Lord's sake, to bear each one of them on his
head, by the tonsure, the form of the crown of thorns
which He bore on His head in His Passion, that He
might bear the thorns and thistles of our sins, that is,
that he might bear them away and take them from us;
to the end that they may show on their foreheads that
they also willingly, and readily, endure all scoffing and
<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>
reproach for his sake; and that they may signify that
they await always <q>the crown of eternal life, which God
hath promised to them that love him,</q><note place='foot'>St. James, i, 12.</note> and that for the
sake of attaining thereto they despise both the evil and
the good of this world. But as for the tonsure which
Simon Magus is said to have used, who is there of the
faithful, I ask you, who does not straightway detest and
reject it at the first sight of it, together with his magic?
Above the forehead it does seem indeed to resemble a
crown; but when you come to look at the neck, you will
find the crown cut short which you thought you saw;
so that you may perceive that such a use properly belongs
not to Christians but to Simoniacs, such as were
indeed in this life by erring men thought worthy of the
glory of an everlasting crown; but in that which is to
follow this life are not only deprived of all hope of a
crown, but are moreover condemned to eternal punishment.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But do not think that I have said thus much, as
though I judged them worthy to be condemned who use
this tonsure, if they uphold the catholic unity by their
faith and works; nay, I confidently declare, that many
of them have been holy men and worthy servants of
God. Of which number is Adamnan,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XV'>15</ref> and notes. It is uncertain whether this incident is to
be connected with Adamnan's first or second visit to King Aldfrid.</note> the notable abbot
and priest of the followers of Columba, who, when sent
on a mission by his nation to King Aldfrid, desired to
see our monastery, and forasmuch as he showed wonderful
wisdom, humility, and piety in his words and behaviour,
I said to him among other things, when I talked
with him, <q>I beseech you, holy brother, how is it that
you, who believe that you are advancing to the crown of
life, which knows no end, wear on your head, after a
fashion ill-suited to your belief, the likeness of a crown
that has an end? And if you seek the fellowship of the
blessed Peter, why do you imitate the likeness of the
tonsure of him whom St. Peter anathematized? and why
do you not rather even now show that you choose with
<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>
all your heart the fashion of him with whom you desire
to live in bliss for ever.</q> He answered, <q>Be assured, my
dear brother, that though I wear the tonsure of Simon,
according to the custom of my country, yet I detest and
abhor with all my soul the heresy of Simon; and I desire,
as far as lies in my small power, to follow the footsteps
of the most blessed chief of the Apostles.</q> I replied, <q>I
verily believe it; nevertheless it is a token that you embrace
in your inmost heart whatever is of Peter the
Apostle, if you also observe in outward form that which
you know to be his. For I think your wisdom easily
discerns that it is much better to estrange from your
countenance, already dedicated to God, the fashion of
his countenance whom with all your heart you abhor,
and of whose hideous face you would shun the sight;
and, on the other hand, that it beseems you to imitate
the manner of his appearance, whom you seek to have
for your advocate before God, even as you desire to
follow his actions and his teaching.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>This I said at that time to Adamnan, who indeed
showed how much he had profited by seeing the ordinances
of our Churches, when, returning into Scotland,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, Ireland; cf. c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XV'>15</ref>.</note> he afterwards
by his preaching led great numbers of that nation
to the catholic observance of the Paschal time; though
he was not yet able to bring back to the way of the
better ordinance the monks that lived in the island of
Hii over whom he presided with the special authority of
a superior. He would also have been mindful to amend
the tonsure, if his influence had availed so far.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But I now also admonish your wisdom, O king, that
together with the nation, over which the King of kings,
and Lord of lords, has placed you, you strive to observe
in all points those things which are in accord with the
unity of the Catholic and Apostolic Church; for so it
will come to pass, that after you have held sway in a
temporal kingdom, the blessed chief of the Apostles will
also willingly open to you and yours with all the elect
the entrance into the heavenly kingdom. The grace of
<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>
the eternal King preserve you in safety, long reigning
for the peace of us all, my dearly beloved son in Christ.</q>
</p>


<p>
This letter having been read in the presence of King
Naiton and many learned men, and carefully interpreted
into his own language by those who could understand
it, he is said to have much rejoiced at the exhortation
thereof; insomuch that, rising from among his
nobles that sat about him, he knelt on the ground,
giving thanks to God that he had been found worthy to
receive such a gift from the land of the English. <q>And
indeed,</q> he said, <q>I knew before, that this was the true
celebration of Easter, but now I so fully learn the reason
for observing this time, that I seem in all points to have
known but little before concerning these matters. Therefore
I publicly declare and protest to you that are here
present, that I will for ever observe this time of Easter,
together with all my nation; and I do decree that this
tonsure, which we have heard to be reasonable, shall be
received by all clerks in my kingdom.</q> Without delay
he accomplished by his royal authority what he had said.
For straightway the Paschal cycles of nineteen years were
sent by command of the State throughout all the provinces
of the Picts to be transcribed, learned, and observed, the
erroneous cycles of eighty-four years being everywhere
blotted out.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>, note 1.</note> All the ministers of the altar and monks
were shorn after the fashion of the crown; and the
nation thus reformed, rejoiced, as being newly put under
the guidance of Peter, the most blessed chief of the
Apostles, and committed to his protection.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_V_Chap_XXII'/>
<head>Chap. XXII. How the monks of Hii, and the monasteries
subject to them, began to celebrate the canonical Easter
at the preaching of Egbert. [716 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
Not long after, those monks also of the Scottish nation,
who lived in the isle of Hii, with the other monasteries that
were subject to them, were by the Lord's doing brought
<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>
to the canonical observance with regard to Easter, and
the tonsure. For in the year of our Lord 716, when
Osred<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>18</ref> and note; cc. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>19</ref>, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XX'>20</ref>, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'>24</ref>. He was killed in battle, but
neither the locality nor the war is known.</note> was slain, and Coenred<note place='foot'>He reigned two years, <hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi> c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>. He belonged to a
younger branch of the royal house of Northumbria. His father's
name was Cuthwine, and Ceolwulf, who succeeded Osric (c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>),
was his brother.</note> took upon him the
government of the kingdom of the Northumbrians, the
father and priest,<note place='foot'>Or, perhaps, <q>bishop;</q> cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_IV'>III, 4</ref>, note. For the circumstances
which led Egbert to undertake his work among the Columban
monasteries, <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_IX'>9</ref>. As the events narrated there were prior to
690 (Wilbrord's mission to Frisia), we may, perhaps, assume
that he had been labouring during this long interval among the
Columban monasteries in Ireland. In <ref target='Book_III_Chap_IV'>III, 4</ref>, Bede places Egbert's
arrival in Iona a year earlier.</note> Egbert, beloved of God, and worthy
to be named with all honour, whom we have before
often mentioned, came to them from Ireland, and was
honourably and joyfully received. Being a most gracious
teacher, and most devout in practising those things
which he taught, and being willingly heard by all, by
his pious and diligent exhortations, he converted them
from that deep-rooted tradition of their fathers, of whom
may be said those words of the Apostle, <q>That they
had a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge.</q><note place='foot'>Rom., x, 2.</note>
He taught them to celebrate the principal solemnity
after the catholic and apostolic manner, as has been
said, wearing on their heads the figure of an unending
crown.<note place='foot'>Cf. p. <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref>. This seems to be the meaning of the somewhat
obscure sentence, <q>... celebrationem, ut diximus, praecipuae
solemnitatis sub figura coronae perpetis agere perdocuit.</q></note> It is manifest that this came to pass by a
wonderful dispensation of the Divine goodness; to the
end, that the same nation which had willingly, and
without grudging, taken heed to impart to the English
people that learning which it had in the knowledge of
God, should afterwards, by means of the English nation,
be brought, in those things which it had not, to a perfect
rule of life. Even as, contrarywise, the Britons, who
<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>
would not reveal to the English the knowledge which
they had of the Christian faith, now, when the English
people believe, and are in all points instructed in the
rule of the Catholic faith, still persist in their errors,
halting and turned aside from the true path, expose
their heads without a crown, and keep the Feast of
Christ apart from the fellowship of the Church of Christ.<note place='foot'>For the conversion of the Britons to Roman usages, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> cc. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XV'>15</ref>
and <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>18</ref>, notes.</note>
</p>

<p>
The monks of Hii, at the teaching of Egbert, adopted the
catholic manner of conversation, under Abbot Dunchad,
about eighty years after they had sent Bishop Aidan to
preach to the English nation.<note place='foot'>This is accurate enough in round numbers. Aidan's mission
(<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_III_Chap_III'>III, 3</ref>) was probably in 635.</note> The man of God, Egbert,
remained thirteen years in the aforesaid island, which he
had thus consecrated to Christ, as it were, by a new ray
of the grace of fellowship and peace in the Church; and
in the year of our Lord 729, in which Easter was celebrated
on the 24th of April, when he had celebrated the
solemnity of the Mass, in memory of the Resurrection of
our Lord, that same day he departed to the Lord and
thus finished, or rather never ceases endlessly to celebrate,
with our Lord, and the Apostles, and the other
citizens of heaven, the joy of that greatest festival, which
he had begun with the brethren, whom he had converted
to the grace of unity. And it was a wonderful dispensation
of the Divine Providence, that the venerable man
passed from this world to the Father, not only at Easter,
but also when Easter was celebrated on that day,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, 24th April. According to the Celtic rule, Easter Day could
never have been so late, 21st April being the latest possible day,
while the Romans might celebrate as late as 25th April.</note> on
which it had never been wont to be celebrated in those
parts. The brethren rejoiced in the sure and catholic
knowledge of the time of Easter, and were glad in that
their father, by whom they had been brought into the
right way, passing hence to the Lord should plead for
them. He also gave thanks that he had so long continued
in the flesh, till he saw his hearers accept and
<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>
keep with him as Easter that day which they had ever
before avoided. Thus the most reverend father being
assured of their amendment, rejoiced to see the day of
the Lord, and he saw it and was glad.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_V_Chap_XXIII'/>
<head>Chap. XXIII. Of the present state of the English nation,
or of all Britain. [725-731 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>]</head>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 725, being the seventh year of
Osric,<note place='foot'>Osric had succeeded in 718. Simeon of Durham says he was
a son of King <q>Alfrid.</q> It has been suggested (Dr. Stubbs,
in Dict. of Christian Biog.) that this may mean Alchfrid, son of
Oswy (<ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIV'>III, 14</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>et saep.</hi>), further, that this Osric is to be identified
with the Hwiccian sub-king, mentioned in <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIII'>IV, 23</ref>, who may have
found a refuge in Mercia, when Alchfrid was disinherited. Against
this it has been maintained that the statement of Simeon of Durham
may, with greater probability, be referred to Aldfrid, the successor
of Egfrid and father of Osred.</note> king of the Northumbrians, who had succeeded
Coenred, Wictred,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVI'>IV, 26</ref>, and <ref target='Book_V_Chap_VIII'>V, 8</ref>.</note> the son of Egbert, king of Kent,
died on the 23rd of April, and left his three sons, Ethelbert,
Eadbert, and Alric,<note place='foot'>From Bede we should infer that they all succeeded in 725, and
the evidence of charters goes to show that Eadbert and Ethelbert
began to reign jointly in that year. Florence of Worcester makes
Eadbert and Ethelbert reign successively, and William of Malmesbury
gives successive reigns of considerable length to all three
brothers. This prolongs Alric's life beyond probability, and as his
reign rests on no early evidence, Dr. Stubbs is inclined to set it
aside altogether.</note> heirs of that kingdom, which
he had governed thirty-four years and a half. The next
year Tobias,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_VIII'>8</ref>.</note> bishop of the church of Rochester, died, a
most learned man, as has been said before; for he was
disciple to those masters of blessed memory, Theodore,
the archbishop, and Abbot Hadrian, wherefore, as has
been said, besides having a great knowledge of letters
both ecclesiastical and general, he learned both the
Greek and Latin tongues to such perfection, that they
were as well known and familiar to him as his native
language. He was buried in the chapel of St. Paul the
<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>
Apostle, which he had built within the church of St.
Andrew<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_II_Chap_III'>II, 3</ref> and note; <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIV'>III, 14</ref>.</note> for his own place of burial. After him Aldwulf<note place='foot'>Consecrated in 727 (Saxon Chronicle) and died in 739 (Simeon
of Durham).</note>
took upon him the office of bishop, having been consecrated
by Archbishop Bertwald.
</p>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 729, two comets appeared
about the sun, to the great terror of the beholders. One
of them went before the sun in the morning at his rising,
the other followed him when he set in the evening, as it
were presaging dire disaster to both east and west; or
without doubt one was the forerunner of the day, and
the other of the night, to signify that mortals were
threatened with calamities at both times. They carried
their flaming brands towards the north, as it were ready
to kindle a conflagration. They appeared in January,
and continued nearly a fortnight. At which time a
grievous blight fell upon Gaul, in that it was laid waste
by the Saracens with cruel bloodshed; but not long after
in that country they received the due reward of their unbelief.<note place='foot'>This must refer to the battle of Tours in 732, in which Charles
Martel defeated the Saracens. As the Ecclesiastical History was
finished in 731, this passage must be regarded as a later insertion.
For Bede's view with regard to the Saracens, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> his theological
works <hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>. He believed them to be the descendants of Ishmael.</note>
In that year the holy man of God, Egbert, departed
to the Lord, as has been said above, on Easter day;<note place='foot'>In 729; <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXII'>22</ref>.</note>
and immediately after Easter, that is, on the 9th of May,
Osric,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>, this chapter, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi></note> king of the Northumbrians, departed this life,
after he had reigned eleven years, and appointed Ceolwulf,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Preface'>Preface</ref>, note 1, and the <ref target='Continuation'>Continuation</ref>.</note>
brother to Coenred,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXII'>22</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad init</hi> and note.</note> who had reigned before him,
his successor; the beginning and progress of whose
reign have been so filled with many and great commotions
and conflicts, that it cannot yet be known what is
to be said concerning them, or what end they will have.
</p>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 731, Archbishop Bertwald
died of old age, on the 13th of January, having held his
<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>
see thirty-seven years, six months and fourteen days.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, since 29th June, 693; <hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_VIII'>8</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi></note>
In his stead, the same year, Tatwine,<note place='foot'>He received the pall in 733 and died in 734; cf. <ref target='Continuation'>Continuation</ref>.</note> of the province
of the Mercians, was made archbishop, having been a
priest in the monastery called Briudun.<note place='foot'>Bredon in Worcestershire.</note> He was consecrated
in the city of Canterbury by the venerable men,
Daniel,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Preface'>Preface</ref>; <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVI'>IV, 16</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>V, 18</ref>.</note> bishop of Winchester, Ingwald of London,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, of the East Saxons. He died in 745; <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Continuation'>Continuation</ref>.</note>
Aldwin of Lichfield,<note place='foot'>Called also Worr. In the Act of the Council of Clovesho in 716
he signs as Bishop of Lichfield (to which at this time Leicester was
united) along with his predecessor, Hedda, but the authenticity of
the Act is not fully established, and it is generally supposed that
he succeeded in 721. At his death in 737 (Simeon of Durham)
Leicester was finally separated from Lichfield.</note> and Aldwulf of Rochester,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref>.</note> on
Sunday, the 10th of June, being a man renowned for
piety and wisdom, and of notable learning in Holy
Scripture.
</p>

<p>
Thus at the present time,<note place='foot'><p>The following list of the English bishoprics at the time when
Bede closed his history [731 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>], will enable the reader to recognize
those which belonged to each separate kingdom:
</p>
<p>
KINGDOMS; SEES; PRELATES.<lb/>
Kent; Canterbury; Tatwine.<lb/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;Rochester; Aldwulf.<lb/>
East Saxons; London; Ingwald.<lb/>
East Angles; Dunwich; Aldbert.<lb/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;Elmham; Hadulac.<lb/>
West Saxons; Winchester; Daniel.<lb/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;Sherborne; Forthere.<lb/>
Mercia; Lichfield (to which Leicester had been reunited in 705); Aldwin.<lb/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;Hereford; Walhstod.<lb/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;Worcester; Wilfrid.<lb/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;Lindsey (Sidnacester); Cynibert.<lb/>
South Saxons; Selsey; Vacant.<lb/>
Northumbria; York; Wilfrid II.<lb/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;Lindisfarne; Ethelwald.<lb/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;Hexham; Acca.<lb/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;Whitern; Pechthelm.
</p></note> the bishops Tatwine and
<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>
Aldwulf preside in the churches of Kent; Ingwald is
bishop in the province of the East Saxons. In the
province of the East Angles, the bishops are Aldbert
and Hadulac;<note place='foot'>Aldbert was Bishop of Dunwich, Hadulac of Elmham.</note> in the province of the West Saxons,
Daniel and Forthere;<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>18</ref>.</note> in the province of the Mercians,
Aldwin.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>, note 6.</note> Among those peoples who dwell beyond the
river Severn to the westward,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, in Herefordshire. It is not certain when the see of Hereford
was founded. Besides Putta (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_II'>IV, 2</ref>, and note), Florence of
Worcester mentions Tyrhtel and Torthere as predecessors of
Walhstod.</note> Walhstod is bishop; in
the province of the Hwiccas, Wilfrid;<note place='foot'>This is Wilfrid, Bishop of Worcester, contemporary with
Wilfrid II of York (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIII'>IV, 23</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_VI'>V, 6</ref>). He succeeded St. Egwin,
whom Bede strangely omits to mention, the successor of Oftfor
(<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIII'>IV, 23</ref>). For the Hwiccas, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> II, 2, p. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, and for the see of Worcester,
IV, 23, p. <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, note 7.</note> in the province
of Lindsey, Bishop Cynibert<note place='foot'>Cf. Preface, p. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, and <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>IV, 12</ref>. For Lindsey as a separate
bishopric, <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi></note> presides; the bishopric of
the Isle of Wight<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVI'>IV, 16</ref>.</note> belongs to Daniel, bishop of the city
of Winchester. The province of the South Saxons,<note place='foot'>Cf. c. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>18</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>, and notes.</note>
having now continued some years without a bishop,
receives episcopal ministrations from the prelate of the
West Saxons. All these provinces, and the other southern
provinces, as far as the boundary formed by the
river Humber, with their several kings, are subject to
King Ethelbald.<note place='foot'>He was a son of Penda's brother, Alweo. He had lived at one
time in retirement near the hermitage of St. Guthlac, flying from
the enmity of Ceolred, but on the death of the latter in 716, he
succeeded to the throne. Though he is not included in Bede's
list of Bretwaldas (<ref target='Book_II_Chap_V'>II, 5</ref>), he established the supremacy of Mercia
for twenty years over all England south of the Humber, till in 754
Wessex freed itself in the battle of Burford. For his wars with
Wessex and Northumbria, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Continuation'>Continuation</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>sub</hi> 740 and 750. There
is a charter of his dated 749 in which he grants certain ecclesiastical
privileges, <q>pro expiatione delictorum suorum.</q> His oppression
of the Church and his private life are rebuked in the letter of Boniface
and five German bishops addressed to him (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Haddan and
Stubbs, III, 350).</note>
</p>

<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>

<p>
But in the province of the Northumbrians, where King
Ceolwulf reigns, four bishops now preside; Wilfrid<note place='foot'>Wilfrid II, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIII'>IV, 23</ref>, and note; cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_VI'>V, 6</ref>.</note>
in the church of York, Ethelwald<note place='foot'>Cf. c. 12, p. <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref>, and note.</note> in that of Lindisfarne,
Acca<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIII'>III, 13</ref>, and note; cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XIV'>IV, 14</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XX'>V, 20</ref>.</note> in that of Hagustald, Pecthelm<note place='foot'>Cf. cc. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIII'>13</ref>, <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>18</ref>. For the <q>White House</q> (Whitern), <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_III_Chap_IV'>III, 4</ref>,
and note. About this time (the exact date is not known) it became
an Anglian see, a fact which indicates that in spite of the defeat of
Egfrid in 685, which freed the Northern Picts, the Picts of Galloway
were still subject to Northumbria. The bishopric came to
an end about the close of the century, when the Northumbrian
power had fallen into decay.</note> in that which is
called the White House, which, as the number of the
faithful has increased, has lately become an episcopal
see, and has him for its first prelate. The Pictish people
also at this time are at peace with the English nation,
and rejoice in having their part in Catholic peace and
truth with the universal Church. The Scots<note place='foot'>The Scots of Dalriada (<ref target='Book_I_Chap_I'>I, 1</ref>). They had recovered their liberty
after the defeat and death of Egfrid; cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVI'>IV, 26</ref>.</note> that inhabit
Britain, content with their own territories, devise
no plots nor hostilities against the English nation. The
Britons,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>, and p. <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref>, note 1.</note> though they, for the most part, as a nation
hate and oppose the English nation, and wrongfully, and
from wicked lewdness, set themselves against the appointed
Easter of the whole Catholic Church; yet, inasmuch
as both Divine and human power withstand
them, they can in neither purpose prevail as they desire;
for though in part they are their own masters, yet part
of them are brought under subjection to the English.
In these favourable times of peace and calm,<note place='foot'>External peace apparently. For the internal state of Northumbria,
<hi rend='italic'>v.s.</hi> p. <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref>.</note> many of
the Northumbrians, as well of the nobility as private
persons, laying aside their weapons, and receiving the
tonsure, desire rather both for themselves and their
children to take upon them monastic vows, than to
practise the pursuit of war. What will be the end hereof,
the next age will see. This is for the present the state
<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>
of all Britain; about two hundred and eighty-five years
after the coming of the English into Britain, and in
the 731st year of our Lord, in Whose kingdom that shall
have no end let the earth rejoice; and Britain being one
with them in the joy of His faith, let the multitude of
isles be glad, and give thanks at the remembrance of His
holiness.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Book_V_Chap_XXIV'/>
<head>Chap. XXIV. Chronological recapitulation of the whole
work: also concerning the author himself.</head>

<p>
I have thought fit briefly to sum up those things which
have been related at length under their particular dates,
that they may be the better kept in memory.<note place='foot'>For the accuracy of these dates, cf. the notes on the events as
they occur in the narrative.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the sixtieth year before the Incarnation of our Lord,
Caius Julius Cæsar, first of the Romans invaded Britain,
and was victorious, yet could not maintain the supreme
power there. [<ref target='Book_I_Chap_II'>I, 2</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year of our Lord, 46, Claudius, being the second
of the Romans who came to Britain, received the surrender
of a great part of the island, and added the
Orkney islands to the Roman empire. [<ref target='Book_I_Chap_III'>I, 3</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 167, Eleuther, being made
bishop at Rome, governed the Church most gloriously
fifteen years.<note place='foot'>The length of his pontificate is not mentioned in the narrative.</note> To whom Lucius, king of Britain, sent a
letter, asking to be made a Christian, and succeeded in
obtaining his request. [<ref target='Book_I_Chap_IV'>I, 4</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year of our Lord 189, Severus, being made
emperor, reigned seventeen years; he fortified Britain
with a rampart from sea to sea. [<ref target='Book_I_Chap_V'>I, 5</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 381, Maximus, being made emperor in
Britain, crossed over into Gaul, and slew Gratian. [<ref target='Book_I_Chap_IX'>I, 9</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 409, Rome was overthrown by the Goths,
from which time the Romans ceased to rule in Britain.
[<ref target='Book_I_Chap_XI'>I, 11</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 430, Palladius was sent by Pope Celestine
<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>
to the Scots that believed in Christ to be their first bishop.
[<ref target='Book_I_Chap_XIII'>I, 13</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 449, Marcian being made emperor with
Valentinian, reigned seven years; in whose time the
English, being called in by the Britons, came into
Britain. [<ref target='Book_I_Chap_XV'>I, 15</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 538, an eclipse of the sun came to pass on
the 16th of February, from the first hour until the third.<note place='foot'>This and the two following entries are not in the narrative.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the year 540, an eclipse of the sun came to pass on
the 20th of June, and the stars appeared during almost
half an hour after the third hour of the day.
</p>

<p>
In the year 547, Ida<note place='foot'>Ida was the first king of Bernicia, and one of the leaders of the
English invasion. He conquered the country about Bamborough,
which he is said to have founded (cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_VI'>III, 6</ref>), and settled his people
here. Deira, which was for a time a separate kingdom, was finally
united to Bernicia under the strong rule of Oswald, Ida's great
grandson (<hi rend='italic'>ib. ad fin.</hi>), who through his mother, Acha, was descended
also from the royal house of Deira.</note> began to reign; he was the
founder of the royal family of the Northumbrians, and
he reigned twelve years.
</p>

<p>
In the year 565, the priest, Columba, came out of
Scotland,<note place='foot'>By Scotland, as usual, Ireland is meant.</note> into Britain, to teach the Picts, and he built
a monastery in the isle of Hii. [<ref target='Book_III_Chap_IV'>III, 4</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 596, Pope Gregory sent Augustine with
monks into Britain, to preach the good tidings of the
Word of God to the English nation. [<ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXIII'>I, 23</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 597, the aforesaid teachers arrived in
Britain; being about the 150th year from the coming of
the English into Britain. [<ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXV'>I, 25</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 601, Pope Gregory sent the pall into Britain
to Augustine, who was already made bishop; he sent
also several ministers of the Word, among whom was
Paulinus. [<ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXIX'>I, 29</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 603, a battle was fought at Degsastan.
[<ref target='Book_I_Chap_XXXIV'>I, 34</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 604, the East Saxons received the faith
of Christ, under King Sabert, Mellitus being bishop.
[<ref target='Book_II_Chap_III'>II, 3</ref>.]
</p>

<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>

<p>
In the year 605, Gregory died. [<ref target='Book_II_Chap_I'>II, 1</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 616, Ethelbert, king of Kent died. [<ref target='Book_II_Chap_V'>II, 5</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 625, Paulinus was ordained bishop of the
Northumbrians by Archbishop Justus. [<ref target='Book_II_Chap_IX'>II, 9</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 626, Eanfled, daughter of King Edwin,
was baptized with twelve others, on the eve of Whitsunday.
[<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>]
</p>

<p>
In the year 627, King Edwin was baptized, with his
nation, at Easter. [<ref target='Book_II_Chap_XIV'>II, 14</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 633, King Edwin being killed, Paulinus
returned to Kent. [<ref target='Book_II_Chap_XX'>II, 20</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 640, Eadbald, king of Kent, died. [<ref target='Book_III_Chap_VIII'>III, 8</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 642, King Oswald was slain. [<ref target='Book_III_Chap_IX'>III, 9</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 644, Paulinus, formerly bishop of York,
but then of the city of Rochester, departed to the Lord.
[<ref target='Book_III_Chap_XIV'>III, 14</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 651, King Oswin was killed, and Bishop
Aidan died. [<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>]
</p>

<p>
In the year 653, the Middle Angles, under their prince,
Penda, were admitted to the mysteries of the faith.
[<ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXI'>III, 21</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 655, Penda was slain, and the Mercians
became Christians. [<ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXIV'>III, 24</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 664, an eclipse came to pass; Earconbert,
king of Kent, died; and Colman with the Scots returned
to his people; a pestilence arose; Ceadda and Wilfrid
were ordained bishops of the Northumbrians. [<ref target='Book_III_Chap_XXVI'>III, 26-28</ref>,
<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_I'>IV, 1</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 668, Theodore was ordained bishop.
[<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_I'>IV, 1</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 670, Oswy, king of the Northumbrians,
died. [<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_V'>IV, 5</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 673, Egbert, king of Kent, died; and a
synod was held at Hertford, in the presence of King
Egfrid, Archbishop Theodore presiding: the synod was
of great profit, and its decrees are contained in ten articles.
[<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>]
</p>

<p>
In the year 675,<note place='foot'>Wulfhere's death is not mentioned in the narrative.</note> Wulfhere, king of the Mercians,
<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>
when he had reigned seventeen years, died and left the
government to his brother Ethelred.
</p>

<p>
In the year 676, Ethelred ravaged Kent. [<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XII'>IV, 12</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 678, a comet appeared; Bishop Wilfrid
was driven from his see by King Egfrid; and Bosa,
Eata, and Eadhaed were consecrated bishops in his
stead. [<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>V, 19</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 679, Aelfwine was killed. [<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXI'>IV, 21</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 680, a synod was held in the plain of
Haethfelth, concerning the Catholic faith, Archbishop
Theodore presiding; John, the Roman abbot, was also
present. The same year also the Abbess Hilda died at
Streanaeshalch. [IV, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVII'>17</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVIII'>18</ref>, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIII'>23</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 685, Egfrid, king of the Northumbrians,
was slain. The same year Hlothere, king of Kent, died.
[<ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVI'>IV, 26</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 688, Caedwald, king of the West Saxons,
went to Rome from Britain. [<ref target='Book_V_Chap_VII'>V, 7</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 690, Archbishop Theodore died. [<ref target='Book_V_Chap_VIII'>V, 8</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 697, Queen Osthryth was murdered by her
own nobles, to wit, the nobles of the Mercians.<note place='foot'>This is not in the narrative. For Osthryth cf. <ref target='Book_III_Chap_XI'>III, 11</ref>; <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXI'>IV, 21</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the year 698, Berctred, an ealdorman of the king
of the Northumbrians, was slain by the Picts.<note place='foot'>Not in the narrative. Berctred is probably to be identified with
Berct in <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVI'>IV, 26</ref> <hi rend='italic'>ad init</hi>. (Ulster Annals: <q>Brectrid</q>; Sax. Chron.:
<q>Briht.</q>)</note>
</p>

<p>
In the year 704, Ethelred, after he had reigned thirty-one
years over the nation of the Mercians, became a
monk, and gave up the kingdom to Coenred. [<ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>V, 19</ref>.]<note place='foot'>Above it is said that he succeeded in 675, making his reign
twenty-nine years, and this agrees with the Saxon Chronicle.
Wilfrid, on his return to England in 705, found him already an
abbot. (<ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>V, 19</ref>.)</note>
</p>

<p>
In the year 705, Aldfrid, king of the Northumbrians,
died. [<ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>V, 18</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 709, Coenred, king of the Mercians, having
reigned five years, went to Rome. [<ref target='Book_V_Chap_XIX'>V, 19</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 711, the commander Bertfrid fought with
the Picts.<note place='foot'>Not in the narrative. Bertfrid was Osred's chief ealdorman,
and was besieged with him in Bamborough by the usurper Eadwulf;
cf. p. <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>, note 2. We find him acting as spokesman in the
Council on the Nidd (V, 19, p. <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>) in demanding to have the Papal
letters translated into English.</note>
</p>

<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>

<p>
In the year 716, Osred, king of the Northumbrians,
was killed; and Ceolred, king of the Mercians, died;
and the man of God, Egbert, brought the monks of Hii
to observe the Catholic Easter and the ecclesiastical
tonsure. [<ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXII'>V, 22</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 725, Wictred, king of Kent, died. [<ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXIII'>V, 23</ref>.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 729, comets appeared; the holy Egbert
passed away; and Osric died. [<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>]
</p>

<p>
In the year 731, Archbishop Bertwald died. [<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>]
</p>

<p>
The same year Tatwine was consecrated ninth archbishop
of the church of Canterbury, in the fifteenth year
of the reign of Ethelbald, king of the Mercians. [<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>]
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Thus much of the Ecclesiastical History of Britain, and
more especially of the English nation, as far as I could
learn either from the writings of the ancients, or the
tradition of our forefathers, or of my own knowledge,
with the help of the Lord, I, Bede,<note place='foot'>For Bede's life, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Introduction.</note> the servant of Christ,
and priest of the monastery of the blessed Apostles, Peter
and Paul, which is at Wearmouth and Jarrow,<note place='foot'>IV, 18, p. <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, note 3.</note> have
set forth. Having been born in the territory of that
same monastery, I was given, by the care of kinsmen, at
seven years of age, to be educated by the most reverend
Abbot Benedict,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note> and afterwards by Ceolfrid,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, note 4, cf. <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XXI'>V, 21</ref>.</note> and spending
all the remaining time of my life a dweller in that
monastery, I wholly applied myself to the study of Scripture;
and amidst the observance of monastic rule, and
the daily charge of singing in the church, I always took
delight in learning, or teaching, or writing. In the nineteenth
year of my age, I received deacon's orders; in
the thirtieth, those of the priesthood, both of them by
the ministry of the most reverend Bishop John,<note place='foot'>John of Beverley, <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXIII'>IV, 23</ref>; <ref target='Book_V_Chap_II'>V, 2-6</ref>.</note> and at
<pb n='387'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>
the bidding of the Abbot Ceolfrid. From the time when I
received priest's orders, till the fifty-ninth year of my age,
I have made it my business, for my own needs and those
of my brethren, to compile out of the works of the venerable
Fathers, the following brief notes on the Holy
Scriptures, and also to make some additions after the
manner of the meaning and interpretation given by
them:<note place='foot'><p>For a full account of Bede's works, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Plummer, vol. I, Introduction,
or Dictionary of Christian Biography, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Beda.</q> Besides
the works mentioned in this list, the following are certainly
genuine:
</p>
<p>
The short <q>Epistola ad Albinum</q> (sent with a copy of the Ecclesiastical
History).
</p>
<p>
<q>Retractationes in Acta.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Epistola ad Egberctum.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>De locis Sanctis</q> (to which Bede alludes in <ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVII'>V. 17</ref>). A number
of other works, some certainly, others probably spurious, and a
few possibly genuine, have been attributed to him.</p></note>
</p>

<p>
On the Beginning of Genesis, to the birth of Isaac and
the casting out of Ishmael, four books.
</p>

<p>
Concerning the Tabernacle and its Vessels, and of the
Vestments of the Priests, three books.
</p>

<p>
On the first part of Samuel, to the Death of Saul,
three books.
</p>

<p>
Concerning the Building of the Temple, of Allegorical
Exposition, and other matters, two books.
</p>

<p>
Likewise on the Book of Kings, thirty Questions.<note place='foot'>An answer to questions put to him by Nothelm (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Preface,
p. <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, note 4, and <ref target='Continuation'>Continuation</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>sub</hi> 735).</note>
</p>

<p>
On the Proverbs of Solomon, three books.
</p>

<p>
On the Song of Songs, seven books.
</p>

<p>
On Isaiah, Daniel, the twelve Prophets, and Part of
Jeremiah, Divisions of Chapters, collected from the Treatise
of the blessed Jerome.
</p>

<p>
On Ezra and Nehemiah, three books.
</p>

<p>
On the song of Habakkuk, one book.
</p>

<p>
On the Book of the blessed Father Tobias, one Book
of Allegorical Explanation concerning Christ and the
Church.
</p>

<p>
Also, Chapters of Readings on the Pentateuch of
Moses, Joshua, and Judges;
</p>

<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>

<p>
On the Books of Kings and Chronicles;
</p>

<p>
On the Book of the blessed Father Job;
</p>

<p>
On the Proverbs,<note place='foot'><q>Parabolae</q> = comparisons. <q>Parabolae Salomonis</q> are the
first words of the Book of Proverbs in the Vulgate.</note> Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs;
</p>

<p>
On the Prophets Isaiah, Ezra, and Nehemiah.
</p>

<p>
On the Gospel of Mark, four books.
</p>

<p>
On the Gospel of Luke, six books.
</p>

<p>
Of Homilies on the Gospel, two books.
</p>

<p>
On the Apostle,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, St. Paul.</note> whatsoever I have found in the works
of St. Augustine I have taken heed to transcribe in order.
</p>

<p>
On the Acts of the Apostles, two books.
</p>

<p>
On the seven Catholic Epistles, a book on each.
</p>

<p>
On the Revelation of St. John, three books.
</p>

<p>
Likewise, Chapters of Lessons on all the New Testament,
except the Gospel.
</p>

<p>
Likewise a book of Epistles to divers Persons, of which
one is of the Six Ages of the world; one of the Halting-places
of the Children of Israel; one on the words of
Isaiah, <q>And they shall be shut up in the prison, and
after many days shall they be visited</q>;<note place='foot'>Isa., xxiv, 22.</note> one of the Reason
of Leap-Year, and one of the Equinox, according to
Anatolius.<note place='foot'><ref target='Book_III_Chap_III'>III, 3</ref>, note; cf. III, 25, p. <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Likewise concerning the Histories of Saints: I translated
the Book of the Life and Passion of St. Felix, Confessor,<note place='foot'>A priest of Nola in Campania. He was of Syrian extraction,
but born at Nola, and ordained priest <hi rend='italic'>circ.</hi> 250 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> He was persecuted
under Decius, and again under Valerian, but escaped.
His history is told in the poems of Paulinus, Bishop of Nola (409-431).</note>
from the metrical work of Paulinus, into prose;
the Book of the Life and Passion of St. Anastasius,<note place='foot'>This work is not known to exist. Probably the saint is Anastasius
the Younger, Patriarch of Antioch, killed in 610 by the Jews
in a sedition on 21st December, and in the Roman martyrology
honoured on that day as a martyr (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Butler, <q>Lives of the
Saints</q>).</note>
which was ill translated from the Greek, and worse
amended by some ignorant person, I have corrected as
to the sense as far as I could; I have written the Life of
<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>
the Holy Father Cuthbert,<note place='foot'>Cf. <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XXVI'>IV, 26-32</ref>.</note> who was both monk and
bishop, first in heroic verse, and afterwards in prose.
</p>

<p>
The History of the Abbots of this monastery, in which
I rejoice to serve the Divine Goodness, to wit, Benedict,
Ceolfrid, and Huaetbert,<note place='foot'>For Benedict and Ceolfrid, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> <ref target='Book_IV_Chap_XVIII'>IV, 18</ref>. Huaetbert belonged to
the monastery of Wearmouth and Jarrow from his earliest childhood,
and succeeded Ceolfrid as abbot in 716. He survived Bede.
The latter dedicated his commentary on the Apocalypse and the
De temp. Rat. to him under his name of Eusebius given him for
his piety (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Bede's Hist. Abb. and Anon., Hist. Abb.).</note> in two books.
</p>

<p>
The Ecclesiastical History of our Island and Nation,
in five books.
</p>

<p>
The Martyrology of the Festivals of the Holy Martyrs,
in which I have carefully endeavoured to set down all
whom I could find, and not only on what day, but also
by what sort of combat, and under what judge they overcame
the world.
</p>

<p>
A Book of Hymns in divers sorts of metre, or rhythm.
</p>

<p>
A Book of Epigrams in heroic or elegiac verse.
</p>

<p>
Of the Nature of Things, and of the Times, one book
of each; likewise, of the Times, one larger book.
</p>

<p>
A book of Orthography arranged in Alphabetical
Order.
</p>

<p>
Likewise a Book of the Art of Poetry, and to it I have
added another little Book of Figures of Speech or Tropes;
that is, of the Figures and Modes of Speech in which
the Holy Scriptures are written.
</p>

<p>
And I beseech Thee, good Jesus, that to whom Thou
hast graciously granted sweetly to drink in the words of
Thy knowledge, Thou wilt also vouchsafe in Thy loving-kindness
that he may one day come to Thee, the Fountain
of all wisdom, and appear for ever before Thy face.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Continuation'/>
<head>Continuation</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Continuation of Bede.</hi><note place='foot'>(Only names which have not occurred in the narrative are
annotated; references for those already mentioned will be found in
the Index.) The Continuation is by a later hand. But Mr. Plummer
considers that the entries under the years 731, 732, 733 and 734,
may have been added by Bede himself. They appear in the great
Moore MS., and those for 733 and 734 also in another eighth century
MS. The entries enclosed in square brackets are found in a
fifteenth century MS.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the year 731 King Ceolwulf was taken prisoner, and
tonsured, and sent back to his kingdom; Bishop Acca
was driven from his see.
</p>

<p>
In the year 732, Egbert<note place='foot'>He succeeded Wilfrid II, and two years later became Archbishop
of York (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi> under 735). It was to him that Bede
addressed the <q>Epist. ad Egberctum.</q></note> was made Bishop of York,
in the room of Wilfrid.
</p>

<p>
[Cynibert Bishop of Lindsey died.]
</p>

<p>
[In the year of our Lord 733, Archbishop Tatwine,
having received the pall by Apostolic authority, ordained
Alwic<note place='foot'>Bishop of Lindsey.</note> and Sigfrid,<note place='foot'>Bishop of Selsey.</note> bishops.]
</p>

<p>
In the year 733, there was an eclipse of the sun on the
14th day of August about the third hour, in such wise
that the whole orb of the sun seemed to be covered with
a black and gloomy shield.
</p>

<p>
In the year 734, the moon, on the 31st of January,
about the time of cock-crowing, was, for about a whole
hour, coloured blood-red, after which a blackness followed,
and she regained her wonted light.
</p>

<p>
In the year from the Incarnation of Christ, 734, bishop
Tatwine died.
</p>

<p>
In the year 735, Nothelm was ordained archbishop;
and bishop Egbert, having received the pall from the
Apostolic see, was the first to be established as
<pb n='391'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>
archbishop<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, of York.</note> after Paulinus, and he ordained Frithbert,<note place='foot'>Bishop of Hexham.</note> and
Frithwald<note place='foot'>Bishop of Whitern.</note> bishops; and the priest Bede died.<note place='foot'>The early authorities differ as to the year, but this is the traditional
date, and is usually accepted.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the year 737, an excessive drought rendered the
land unfruitful; and Ceolwulf, voluntarily receiving the
tonsure, left the kingdom to Eadbert.<note place='foot'>King of Northumbria 737-758 (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi>); died in 768. He was
a son of Eata, called by Nennius, Eata <q>Glinmaur,</q> a descendant
of Ida, and was the brother of Archbishop Egbert. Under him
the Northumbrian power revived for a period.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the year 739, Edilhart,<note place='foot'>He was the kinsman and predecessor of Cuthred (<hi rend='italic'>v. infra</hi>).</note> king of the West-Saxons,
died, as did Archbishop Nothelm.
</p>

<p>
In the year 740, Cuthbert<note place='foot'>Archbishop of Canterbury in succession to Nothelm. The first
archbishop not buried in St. Augustine's, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> II, 3, p. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, note.</note> was consecrated in Nothelm's
stead. Ethelbald, king of the Mercians, cruelly
and wrongfully wasted part of Northumbria, their king,
Eadbert, with his army, being employed against the
Picts. Bishop Ethelwald died also, and Conwulf,<note place='foot'>Bishop of Lindisfarne in succession to Ethelwald (<ref target='Book_V_Chap_XII'>V, 12</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>ad fin.</hi>,
note).</note> was
consecrated in his stead. Arnwin<note place='foot'>Probably a son of that Eadwulf who usurped the throne of
Northumbria at Aldfrid's death (<ref target='Book_V_Chap_XVIII'>V, 18</ref>); cf. Simeon of Durham, II,
38 (Rolls Series), <q>Arwine filius Eadulfi.</q></note> and Eadbert<note place='foot'>Not known.</note> were
slain.
</p>

<p>
In the year 741, a great drought came upon the
country. Charles,<note place='foot'>Charles Martel.</note> king of the Franks, died; and his
sons, Caroloman and Pippin,<note place='foot'>Pippin the Short. Carloman resigned in 747, and became a
monk.</note> reigned in his stead.
</p>

<p>
In the year 745, Bishop Wilfrid and Ingwald, Bishop
of London, departed to the Lord.
</p>

<p>
In the year 747, the man of God, Herefrid,<note place='foot'>There is a letter of Boniface (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> Haddan and Stubbs III, 358) to
a priest, Herefrid, who is supposed to be the man mentioned here.</note> died.
</p>

<p>
In the year 750, Cuthred, king of the West Saxons,
rose up against king Ethelbald and Oengus; Theudor
<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>
and Eanred died; Eadbert added the plain of Kyle and
other places to his dominions.<note place='foot'>This seems confused and obscure. The West Saxons under
Cuthred threw off the Mercian yoke in the insurrection which culminated
in the battle of Burford (<hi rend='italic'>v.</hi> V. 23, p. <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>, note 9).
Oengus or Angus (the Brythonic form is Ungust), son of Fergus,
was a Pictish king who crushed the Dalriadic Scots, and, in alliance
with Eadbert of Northumbria, conquered the Britons of Strathclyde.
But this does not explain the strange statement which
brings him into connection with Ethelbald of Mercia. Nor is it
told who Eanred was. Theudor was a king of the Britons of
Strathclyde. Kyle is a district in Ayrshire.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the year 753, in the fifth year of King Eadbert, on
the 9th of January,<note place='foot'>Adopting the emendation <q>quinto Idus</q> (Hussey). The date
is thus right for the eclipses, but the year is the sixteenth of Eadbert.
Probably the numeral (XVI) has fallen out, and the passage
ought to run: <q>anno regni Eadbercti XVI, quinto Id. Ian.</q></note> an eclipse of the sun came to pass;
afterwards, in the same year and month, on the 24th day
of January, the moon suffered an eclipse, being covered
with a gloomy, black shield, in like manner as was the
sun a little while before.
</p>

<p>
In the year 754, Boniface,<note place='foot'>The great missionary bishop of Germany, a West Saxon by
birth. He crossed to the Continent <hi rend='italic'>circ.</hi> 716, and, supported by
Charles Martel and his sons, evangelized Central Europe, became
Archbishop of Mainz, and founded sees throughout Germany.
Finally he was martyred in Frisland. Lul, a West Saxon, was
his successor, not Redger, but it has been suggested that this may
be another name for him. The pope is Stephen III.</note> called also Winfrid, Bishop
of the Franks, received the crown of martyrdom, together
with fifty-three others; and Redger was consecrated
archbishop in his stead, by pope Stephen.
</p>

<p>
In the year 757, Ethelbald, king of the Mercians, was
treacherously and miserably murdered, in the night, by
his own guards; Beornred<note place='foot'>He is said by William of Malmesbury to have been the murderer
of Ethelbald. After a year of anarchy Offa succeeded, and
retrieved the position of Mercia.</note> began his reign; Cyniwulf,<note place='foot'>He was killed in an insurrection in 784. (Sax. Chron.)</note>
king of the West Saxons, died; and the same
year, Offa, having put Beornred to flight, sought to gain
the kingdom of the Mercians by bloodshed.
</p>

<p>
In the year 758, Eadbert, king of the Northumbrians,
<pb n='393'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>
receiving St. Peter's tonsure for the love of God, and to
the end that he might take the heavenly country by
force,<note place='foot'>St. Matt. xi, 12. After Eadbert, Northumbria fell into a state
of anarchy, obscure kings contending for the throne.</note> left the kingdom to his son Oswulf.
</p>

<p>
In the year 755, Oswulf was wickedly murdered by
his own thegns; and Ethelwald, being chosen the same
year by his people, entered upon the kingdom; in whose
second year there was great tribulation by reason of
pestilence, which continued almost two years, divers
grievous sicknesses raging, but more especially the disease
of dysentery.
</p>

<p>
In the year 761, Oengus,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>supra, sub</hi> 750.</note> king of the Picts, died;
who, from the beginning to the end of his reign, continued
to be a blood-stained and tyrannical butcher;
Oswin<note place='foot'>An aetheling killed by Moll, king of Northumbria, at a place
called Edwin's Cliff (Sax. Chron.).</note> was also slain.
</p>

<p>
In the year 765, King Aluchred came to the throne.<note place='foot'>Of Northumbria.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the year 766 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, Archbishop Egbert, of the royal
race, and endued with divine knowledge, as also Frithbert,
both of them truly faithful bishops, departed to the
Lord.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='395'/><anchor id='Pg395'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index</head>

<lg>
<l>Aaron, British Martyr, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aaron, High Priest, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Abbots'/>
<l><q>Abbots, Anonymous History of the,</q> editorial references to, <ref target='Pgxxxv'>xxxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> n., <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>and see</hi> <ref target='Index-Bede'>Bede</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Abercorn'/>
<l>Abercorn or Aebbercurnig, Monastery of, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abraham's Oak, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abraham's Tomb, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Acca'/>
<l>Acca, friend of Bede, afterwards Bishop of Hexham, in succession to Wilfrid, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n., <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his attachment to Wilfrid, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>driven from his see, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his good works, musical gifts and learning, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>educated by Bosa, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acha, sister of Edwin, wife of Ethelfrid, and mother of Oswald, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acts of the Apostles, quoted, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Adalbert, Life of,</q> editorial reference to, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adam, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his tomb, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Adamnan-Iona'/>
<l>Adamnan, Abbot of Iona, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> n., <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his work on the Holy Places (<q>De Locis Sanctis</q>), <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his <q>Life of St. Columba,</q> <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his missions to King Aldfrid, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converts the Irish to the Catholic Easter and ecclesiastical tonsure, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref>, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receives Arculf, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>return to Ireland, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adamnan, Monk of Coldingham, foretells the burning of Coldingham Monastery, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his vision, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his penitence, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his austerity, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ad-Barvae'/>
<l>Ad Barvae, or At the Wood, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adda, Northumbrian priest, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Addi, a thegn, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adeodatus, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adgefrin, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Yeavering'>Yeavering</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adtuifyrdi, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Twyford'>Twyford</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adulwald, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Eadbald'>Eadbald</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aebba'/>
<l>Aebba, Abbess of Coldingham, half-sister of Oswy, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her name, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>founds the monasteries of Ebchester and Coldingham, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her friendship for Cuthbert, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>intercedes for Wilfrid, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> n., <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her death, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aebbercurnig, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Abercorn'>Abercorn</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aecci'/>
<l>Aecci, Bishop of Dunwich, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aedan'/>
<l>Aedan, King of Scots, defeated by Ethelfrid, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aedgils, fellow priest of Bede, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aelfric (<q>Grammaticus</q>) editorial reference to, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aelfric, father of Osric, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aelfwine'/>
<l>Aelfwine, brother of Egfrid, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='396'/><anchor id='Pg396'/>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aelli-Deira'/>
<l>Aelli, King of Deira, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Gregory's pun on his name, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aelli'/>
<l>Aelli, King of Sussex, first Bretwalda, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aenhere'/>
<l>Aenhere, King of the Hwiccas, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aescwine'/>
<l>Aescwine, Sub-king of Wessex, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aesica, a little boy dedicated to religion, <ref target='Pgxxxiii'>xxxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aetherius'/>
<l>Aetherius, Archbishop of Lyons, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aetius, the Consul, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>put to death by Valentinian, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aetla'/>
<l>Aetla, Bishop of Dorchester, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aetswinapathe, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ouestraefelda'>Ouestraefelda</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Africa, Churches of, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agabus, the prophet, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agatha, St., <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agatho, Pope, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends John the precentor to report on the English Church, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>holds a Synod against the Monothelites, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tries Wilfrid's cause, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agatho, a priest, companion of Agilbert, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Agilbert'/>
<l>Agilbert, missionary to the West Saxons, Bishop of Dorchester, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offended by Coinwalch, returns to Gaul, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made Bishop of Paris, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>refuses to return to England, and sends Leutherius in his place, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the Whitby Synod, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his ignorance of English, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>entertains Theodore, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consecrates Wilfrid, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agnes, St., <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref> n., <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agricola, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agricola, son of Severianus, a Pelagian, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aidan'/>
<l>Aidan, Monk of Iona, Abbot and Bishop of Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref> n., <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref> n., <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bede's admiration for, <ref target='Pgxxxix'>xxxix</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his mission to Northumbria, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his life, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordination, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his character, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his doctrine, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his good example, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his rebuke to Corman, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gives his horse to a beggar, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his friendship for Oswin, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref> n., <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his prevision of Oswin's death, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>foretells and calms a storm, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his miracles, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Farne, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>saves Bamborough from fire, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his body translated to Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his observance of Easter, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his disciples, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his rule, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>persuades Hilda to return to Northumbria, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consecrates Heiu as a nun, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aire, the River, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Akeburg'/>
<l>Akeburgh (perhaps Jacobsburgh), <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alani, the, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alaric, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alban, St., <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his conversion, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lives of, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>miracles, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his tomb, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his blood, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Albinus'/>
<l>Albinus, Abbot of St. Augustine's Monastery, Canterbury, in succession to Hadrian, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> n., <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his scholarship, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>furnishes Bede with materials for the <q>Ecclesiastical History,</q> <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albion, early name of Britain, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alchfled, daughter of Oswy, wife of Peada, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alchfrid, King of Deira, son of Oswy, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rebels against Oswy, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converts Peada, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the battle of the Winwaed, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>friendship for Wilfrid, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his observance of Easter, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Whitby, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>friendship for Coinwalch of Wessex, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='397'/><anchor id='Pg397'/>

<lg>
<l>Alcluith, or Dumbarton, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Dumbarton'>Dumbarton</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Alcuin'/>
<l>Alcuin, his letter to the monks of Wearmouth, <ref target='Pgxxxv'>xxxv</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his influence on learning, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his anecdote of Bede, <ref target='Pgxxxvii'>xxxvii</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his <q>De Sanct. Ebor.</q> quoted, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n., <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his <q>Life of Wilbrord</q> quoted, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ref. to, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref> n., <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref> n., <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aldbert'/>
<l>Aldbert, Bishop of Dunwich, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aldfrid'/>
<l>Aldfrid, King of Northumbria after Egfrid, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> n., <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relations with Wilfrid, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref> n., <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>retrieves the fortunes of Northumbria, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>visits Drythelm, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>friendship for Adamnan, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his exile in Iona, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aldgils'/>
<l>Aldgils, King of Frisland, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aldhelm'/>
<l>Aldhelm, Bishop of Sherborne, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> n., <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> n., <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref> n., <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his women scholars, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letter to Geraint, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> n., <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letter to Wilfrid's clergy, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made Abbot of Malmesbury, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n., <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n., <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried at St. Michael's, Malmesbury, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his literary works, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aldwin-Partney'/>
<l>Aldwin, Abbot of Partney or Peartaneu, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aldwin-Worr'/>
<l>Aldwin, or Worr, Bishop of Lichfield, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aldwulf-Rochester'/>
<l>Aldwulf, Bishop of Rochester, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aldwulf-King'/>
<l>Aldwulf, King of East Anglia, son of Ethelhere, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his support of Ethelthryth, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alemanni, the, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexandria, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexandria, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Cyril'>Cyril</ref>, <ref target='Index-Theophilus'>Theophilus</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexandrians, the, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alfred, his translation of the <q>Ecclesiastical History,</q> <ref target='Pgxx'>xx</ref>, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Alfrid'/>
<l><q>Alfrid,</q> King of Northumbria, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Allectus, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Allelujah, or Hallelujah, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>All Martyrs, the Festival of, later the festival of All Saints, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>All Saints, the Festival of, introduced by Pope Boniface, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alne, the River, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Alric'/>
<l>Alric, son of Wictred of Kent, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aluchred'/>
<l>Aluchred, King of Northumbria, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alweo, brother of Penda, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Alwic'/>
<l>Alwic, Bishop of Lindsey, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amasea, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Asterius'>Asterius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amber, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ambleteuse, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Amfleat'>Amfleat</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ambrose, St., quoted, <ref target='Pgxlii'>xlii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ambrosius Aurelianus, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Amfleat'/>
<l>Amfleat, or Ambleteuse, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amphibalus, St., <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amulets, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anastasis (Resurrection of our Lord), Church at Jerusalem, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Anastasius'/>
<l>Anastasius, St., <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Anatolius'/>
<l>Anatolius, Bishop of Laodicea, authority on the Easter question, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref>, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref> n., <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ancyra, a cloak of, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Andeley-sur-Seine'/>
<l>Andeley-sur-Seine, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andhun, ealdorman, rules the South Saxons, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andilegum, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Andeley-sur-Seine'>Andeley-sur-Seine</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andragius, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Androgius'>Androgius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andredsweald, the, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andrew, a monk, refuses the English Archbishopric, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andrew, St., <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> n., <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Androgius'/>
<l>Androgius, Andragius, Androgorius or Mandubracius, Chief of the Trinovantes, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angels, <ref target='Pgxxxviii'>xxxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref>, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angles, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Gregory's pun upon, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='398'/><anchor id='Pg398'/>

<lg>
<l>Anglesea, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Anglia'/>
<l>Anglia, the name of, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angrivarii, the, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angulus, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Anglia'>Anglia</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Anna'/>
<l>Anna, King of East Anglia, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> n., <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his piety, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his good children, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain by Penda, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>enriches the monastery of Cnobheresburg, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Annales Cambriae,</q> editorial references to, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> n., <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Annales Francorum,</q> editorial reference to, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Annegray, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Annemundus'/>
<l>Annemundus (Dalfinus), Archbishop of Lyons, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his kindness to Wilfrid, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his execution, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Anselm'/>
<l>Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antioch, Patriarch of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Anastasius'>Anastasius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antoninus Pius, his rampart, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Antonius-Bassianus'/>
<l>Antonius, Bassianus, Emperor, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antwerp, <ref target='Pgxxi'>xxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Appleby'/>
<l>Appleby, Thomas, Bishop of Carlisle, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apollinarianism, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apostles, the, their manner of tonsure, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aquila, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aquileia, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aquitaine, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> n., <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> n., <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arcadius, Emperor of the East, son of Theodosius, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Arculf'/>
<l>Arculf, Bishop of Gaul, <ref target='Pg337'>337-340</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Argyll, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arianism, <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> n., <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arles, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bishop of, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arles, Archbishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-John-Arles'>John</ref>, <ref target='Index-Vergilius'>Vergilius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Armagh, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Tomene'>Tomene</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Armagh, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Tomene'>Tomene</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Armenia, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Armorica, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Armoricans, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arnwin, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Arwald'/>
<l>Arwald, King of the Isle of Wight, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his brothers, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asclepiodotus, restores Britain to the Romans, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ascension, the Basilica of the, at Jerusalem, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asia, Churches of, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Asterius-Genoa'/>
<l>Asterius, Bishop of Genoa (Archbishop of Milan), <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Asterius'/>
<l>Asterius, Bishop of Amasea, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Astronomy, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athelstan, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atlantic, the, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>At the Stone, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Stoneham'>Stoneham</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>At the Wood, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ad-Barvae'>Ad Barvae</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Attila, King of the Huns, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Audrey, popular form of Ethelthryth, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Augustine'/>
<l>Augustine, St., sent by Pope Gregory to convert the English, <ref target='Pgxxi'>xxi</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref> n., <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordained abbot, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recommended to Aetherius, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lands in Thanet, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> n., <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>received by Ethelbert and Bertha, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>settles at Canterbury, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his report to Gregory, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordained Archbishop of the English at Arles, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his see, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recommended by Gregory to Vergilius, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receives the pall, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his miracles, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recommended to Ethelbert by Gregory, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>restores the Church of St. Saviour, Canterbury, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>builds the Monastery of SS. Peter and Paul, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>calls a Synod, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his dispute with the British bishops, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his prophecy of disaster, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordains Mellitus and Justus, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried in the Church of SS. Peter and Paul, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his tomb and epitaph, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his body translated, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his monastic rule, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='399'/><anchor id='Pg399'/>

<lg>
<l>Augustine, St., Bishop of Hippo, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Sentences of, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augustine's Ác, or Augustine's Oak, Synod at, <ref target='Pg084'>84-86</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augustus, Emperor, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aurelius'/>
<l>Aurelius Commodus, Emperor, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aurelius Victor, quoted, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aust, probably Augustine's Ác, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Austerfield, Northumbria, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Austrasia, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Dagobert-II'>Dagobert</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Avon, the River, in Linlithgow, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aylesford, Kent, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ayrshire, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> n., <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babbanburch, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Bamborough'>Bamborough</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Badbury, Dorsetshire, supposed to be Badon Hill, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Badon Hill, Battle of, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baducing, patronymic of Benedict Biscop, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Badudegn, a monk of Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref>, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Badwin'/>
<l>Badwin, Bishop of Elmham, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baithanus, Irish bishop, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Balder, the God, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Baldhild'/>
<l>Baldhild, or Bathild, Queen Regent of Neustria, wife of Clovis II, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref> n., <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ballads, English, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baltic, The, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Bamborough'/>
<l>Bamborough, Babbanburch, Bebbanburh, or Bebburgh, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref> n., <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bangor, alleged birthplace of Pelagius, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bangor-is-Coed, or Bancornaburg, monastery of, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> n., <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bangor, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Dinoot'>Dinoot</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baptism, of women, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of children, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its practice in the British Church, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the Roman Church, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proper days for, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ritual of, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Bardney'/>
<l>Bardney, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> n., <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>endowed by Ethelred and Osthryth, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burial place of Oswald, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bardney, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ethelred'>Ethelred</ref>, <ref target='Index-Hygbald'>Hygbald</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Barking'/>
<l>Barking, or In Berecingum, Monastery of, <ref target='Pgxxviii'>xxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxiii'>xxxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barking, Abbess of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ethelburg'>Ethelburg</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barrow, Lincolnshire, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barton-on-Humber, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basil, St., his Hexameron, quoted, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bassianus, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Antonius-Bassianus'>Antonius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bassus, Edwin's thegn, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bathild, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Baldhild'>Baldhild</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baths of Britain, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bay of the Lighthouse, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Whitby-Bay'>Whitby</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beardaneu, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Bardney'>Bardney</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bebba, Queen, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bebbanburh, or Bebburgh, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Bamborough'>Bamborough</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Bede'/>
<l>Bede, or Beda, the author, called <q>Venerable,</q> <ref target='Pgxxi'>xxi</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of his life, <ref target='Pgxxxiii'>xxxiii-xliii</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his family, <ref target='Pgxxxiii'>xxxiii</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>born near Wearmouth, <ref target='Pgxxxiii'>xxxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his instructors, <ref target='Pgxxxiii'>xxxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> n., <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his ordination, <ref target='Pgxxxiii'>xxxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref> n., <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his life spent in the Monastery of Wearmouth and Jarrow, <ref target='Pgxxxiii'>xxxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref> n., <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dates of his birth and death, <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his autobiography, <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386-389</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his diligence, <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his eyes dim in age, <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death, <ref target='Pgxix'>xix</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxix'>xxxix-xliii</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his epitaph, <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his learning, <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxxv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his style, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>visits Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>visits York, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Egbert his pupil, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his <q>Epistola ad Ecgbertum,</q> <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref> n., <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his influence, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his last illness, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxix'>xxxix</ref>, <ref target='Pgxl'>xl</ref>, <ref target='Pgxlii'>xlii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxliii'>xliii</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his <q>Life of Cuthbert</q> in prose and verse, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref> n., <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> n., <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> n., <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> n.,
<pb n='400'/><anchor id='Pg400'/>
<ref target='Pg288'>288</ref> n., <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>story of his visit to Rome, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>story of his residence at Cambridge, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his writings, <ref target='Pgxxxvii'>xxxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>list of his literary works and compilations, <ref target='Pg386'>386-389</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his studies, <ref target='Pgxxxvii'>xxxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386-389</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his duties, <ref target='Pgxxxvii'>xxxvii</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his character, <ref target='Pgxxxvii'>xxxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxviii'>xxxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxix'>xxxix</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his zeal for Catholic usages, <ref target='Pgxxxviii'>xxxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxix'>xxxix</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his admiration for Aidan, <ref target='Pgxxxix'>xxxix</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dictates to Wilbert his translation of St. John and St. Isidore, <ref target='Pgxlii'>xlii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxliii'>xliii</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried at Jarrow, <ref target='Pgxl'>xl</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relics stolen by Elfred and carried to Durham, <ref target='Pgxl'>xl</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>translated with those of St. Cuthbert to the new Cathedral, <ref target='Pgxl'>xl</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a shrine erected to him by Hugh de Puisac, <ref target='Pgxl'>xl</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his chronology corrected, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> n., <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref> n., <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> n., <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref> n., <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref> n., <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> n., <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref> n., <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> n., <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref> n., <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref> n., <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref> n., <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref> n., <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref> n., <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref> n., <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> n., <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his <q>Martyrology,</q> editorial references to, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref> n., <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> n., <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his friendship for Acca, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his <q>De Temporibus,</q> <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his <q>De temporum Ratione,</q> <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his <q>History of the Abbots,</q> <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref> n., <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> n., <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> n., <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>uses the Caesarean system of Indictions, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his <q>De Locis Santis,</q> <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref> n., <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>said to have written Ceolfrid's Letter to Naiton, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his <q>Expositio in Marci Evangelium,</q> <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his <q>Ecclesiastical History,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ecclesiastical-History'>Ecclesiastical</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bega, Irish Saint, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref> n., <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Begu, a nun, has a vision of Hilda's death, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Belgium, or Belgic Gaul, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benedict I, Pope, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Benedict-Biscop'/>
<l>Benedict Biscop, Abbot of Wearmouth, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> n., <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bede trained under, <ref target='Pgxxxiii'>xxxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>founds the monasteries of Wearmouth and Jarrow, <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his library, <ref target='Pgxxxv'>xxxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> n., <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>temporary abbot of SS. Peter and Paul's Monastery, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>goes to Rome, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brings John the Precentor back with him to Britain, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>obtains a letter of privilege for his monastery, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his monastic rule, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benedictus Crispus, Archbishop of Milan, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benedictine Order of Monks, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beneventum, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benjamin, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Beornred'/>
<l>Beornred, King of Mercia, said to have murdered Ethelbald, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Berct'/>
<l>Berct, Berctred, Brectrid or Briht, Egfrid's General, lays Ireland waste, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain by the Picts, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berecingum, or Barking, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Barking'>Barking</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berkshire, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> n., <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bernicia, History of, xxvi, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> n., <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> n., <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diocese of, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bernicia, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Eata'>Eata</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bernicia, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Eanfrid-Bernicia'>Eanfrid</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ethelric'>Ethelric</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ida'>Ida</ref>, <ref target='Index-Oswald'>Oswald</ref>, <ref target='Index-Oswy'>Oswy</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bernwin, Wilfrid's nephew, his mission to the Isle of Wight, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bersted, Witenagemot of, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bertfrid, Osrid's Ealdorman, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bertgils, surnamed Boniface, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Boniface-Bertgils'>Boniface</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bertha, daughter of Charibert, wife of Ethelbert of Kent, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> n., <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berthun, Ethelwalch's Ealdorman, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Berthun'/>
<l>Berthun, Abbot of Beverley, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref> n., <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Bertwald'/>
<l>Bertwald, Archbishop of Canterbury after Theodore, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref> n., <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n., <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref> n., <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his burial place, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his election and consecration, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref> n., <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Abbot of Reculver,
<pb n='401'/><anchor id='Pg401'/>
<ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his learning, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordains Tobias, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>returns from the Continent, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reconciled to Wilfrid, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref> n., <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the Synod on the Nidd, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consecrates Aldwulf, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berwickshire, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Betendune, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Watton'>Watton</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bethlehem, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Betti, a Northumbrian priest, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beverley, Inderauuda, or In the Wood of the Deiri, Monastery of, founded by John and Berthun, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref> n., <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beverley, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Berthun'>Berthun</ref>, <ref target='Index-John-Beverley'>John</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bewcastle, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Birinus'/>
<l>Birinus, Bishop of Dorchester, converts the West Saxons, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consecrated by Asterius, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried at Dorchester, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his body translated to Winchester, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Biscop, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Benedict-Biscop'>Benedict</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Bishop-Burton'/>
<l>Bishop Burton, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bishops, rules for, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their stipends, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consecration of, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bishoprics, English, List of in 731 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>subdivision of, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> n., <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242-4</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> n., <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref> n., <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Bisi'/>
<l>Bisi, Bishop of Dunwich after Boniface, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref> n., <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blackwater, the River, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blaecca, Reeve of Lincoln, converted, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bledla, King of the Huns, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blessed Mother of God, Church of the, at Lastingham, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Barking, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in St. Augustine's, Canterbury, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Blithryda'/>
<l>Blithryda, or Plectrude, wife of Pippin, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blood-letting, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bobbio, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boethius referred to, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Boisil'/>
<l>Boisil, Provost of Melrose, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches Cuthbert, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>appears to one of his disciples in dreams, and forbids Egbert to go to the Germans, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boniface IV, Pope, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his pastoral letters to the English Church, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boniface V, Pope, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his letters, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends the pall to Justus, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends gifts to Edwin, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to Ethelberg, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boniface, St., editorial references to, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> n., <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref> n., <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n., <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref> n., <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref> n., <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> n., <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref> n., <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref> n., <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his martyrdom, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Boniface-Bertgils'/>
<l>Boniface, or Bertgils, Bishop of Dunwich, or of the East Angles, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref> n., <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boniface, the Archdeacon, Pope's Counsellor at Wilfrid's second trial, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boniface (probably St. Cuiritin), missionary, converts Naiton to Roman usages, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bordeaux, Pilgrim of, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Borrowdale, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boructuari, The, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> n., <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converted by Suidbert, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Bosa'/>
<l>Bosa, Bishop of Deira or York, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consecrated in Wilfrid's place, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>educated at Whitby under Hilda, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Bosel'/>
<l>Bosel, Bishop of Worcester, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bosham, or Bosanhamm, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bothelm, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Boulogne'/>
<l>Boulogne, or Gessoriacum, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref> n., <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bowmont Water, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bowness-on-Solway, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boy, a Saxon, his dying vision of SS. Peter and Paul, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='402'/><anchor id='Pg402'/>

<lg>
<l>Bradford-on-Avon, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Bredon'/>
<l>Bredon, or Briudun, monastery of, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bregusuid, mother of Hilda, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bretwalda, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aelli'>Aelli</ref>, <ref target='Index-Caelin'>Caelin</ref>, <ref target='Index-Edwin'>Edwin</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ethelbert'>Ethelbert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Oswald'>Oswald</ref>, <ref target='Index-Oswy'>Oswy</ref>, <ref target='Index-Redwald'>Redwald</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Bridius'/>
<l>Bridius, or Bruide Mac Maelchon, King of the Picts, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> n., <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Brige'/>
<l>Brige, In Brige, or Faremoûtier-en-Brie, monastery of, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brige, Abbess of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Fara'>Fara</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ethelberg-Brige'>Ethelberg</ref>, <ref target='Index-Saethryth'>Saethryth</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bright, his <q>Early English Church History,</q> vi;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>references to, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref> n., <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref> n., <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n., <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref> n., <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> n., <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> n., <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref> n., <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref> n., <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref> n., <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> n., <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> n., <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> n., <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref> n., <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Briht, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Berct'>Berct</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Britain, <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Roman occupation of, <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pg009'>9-23</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>description of, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>language, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>freed from Roman rule, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Romans return to, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its corruption during peace, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>suffers from a plague, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>overrun by the Angles and Saxons, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>civil wars in, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converted to Christianity, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Britain, Church of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-British'>British</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Britain, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Lucius-Britain'>Lucius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Britannicus, son of Claudius, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-British'/>
<l>British Church, <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxix'>xxxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its attitude towards the Easter question, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref> n., <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>refuses allegiance to Augustine, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>approached by Laurentius, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>British Museum, The, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Britons'/>
<l>Britons, or Brythons, <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeated by Ethelfrid, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>origin of, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>language, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Britons of Strathclyde, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Britons of Strathclyde, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Theudor'>Theudor</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brittany, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Briudun, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Bredon'>Bredon</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brocmail, Welsh Prince, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bromnis, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bructeri, The, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bruide, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Bridius'>Bridius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Bruide-Mac-Bili'/>
<l>Bruide Mac Bili, King of the Picts, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brythons, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Britons'>Britons</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buckinghamshire, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bulgarians, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burford, Battle of, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref> n., <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burgh Castle, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Burgh-Castle'/>
<l>Burgh Castle, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Fursa'>Fursa</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burghelm, a priest of Wilfrid's, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burgundians, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burgundofarus, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Faro'>Faro</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burgundy, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burton, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Bishop-Burton'>Bishop</ref>, <ref target='Index-North-Burton'>North</ref>, <ref target='Index-South-Burton'>South</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bury, Professor, his <q>Life of St. Patrick,</q> reference to, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Butler, his <q>Lives of the Saints,</q> reference to, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cadvan'/>
<l>Cadvan, father of Caedwalla the Briton, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cadwalader, son of Caedwalla the Briton, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cadwallon, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Caedwalla-Cadwallon'>Caedwalla</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caedmon, the Poet, his life and death, <ref target='Pg277'>277-281</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Caedwalla-Cadwallon'/>
<l>Caedwalla, or Cadwallon, King of Gwynedd in Wales, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his revolt against Edwin, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>allied with Penda, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his cruelty, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a Christian, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>besieged by Osric in York, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kills Osric, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kills Eanfrid by treachery, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain by Oswald, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Caedwalla-Wessex'/>
<l>Caedwalla, King of Wessex, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> n., <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in exile, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kills Ethelwalch in battle, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expelled by Andhun and Berthun, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kills Berthun, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquers and reunites Wessex, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquers the South Saxons and the Isle of Wight, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relations with Wilfrid, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kills
<pb n='404'/><anchor id='Pg404'/>
Arwald's brothers, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in concealment at Redbridge, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wounded in the Isle of Wight, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abdicates, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his pilgrimage to Rome, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>baptized under the name of Peter, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dies at Rome, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried in St. Peter's, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his epitaph, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Caelin'/>
<l>Caelin, or Ceaulin, King of the West Saxons, second Bretwalda, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caelin, brother of Cedd, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Caerleon'/>
<l>Caerleon-on-Usk, or City of Legions, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Caesar'/>
<l>Caesar, Caius Julius, editorial references to his works, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> n., <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his invasion of Britain, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>returns to Gaul, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caesarea, library of, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Eusebius-Pamphili'>Eusebius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caesarean System of Indictions, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> n., <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caiaphas, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cairbre Riada, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Reuda'>Reuda</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Caistor'/>
<l>Caistor, or Cyneburgacaster, Abbess of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Cyneburg'>Cyneburg</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Calcaria'/>
<l>Calcaria, or Kaelcacaestir, now Tadcaster, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cale, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Chelles'>Chelles</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caledonians, the, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cambridge, <ref target='Pgxix'>xix</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref> n., <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cambridgeshire, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref> n., <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n., <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Campania, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Campodonum'/>
<l>Campodonum, or Donafeld, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canche, the, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Candidus, a presbyter, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cannes, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canons of the Western Church, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Canterbury'/>
<l>Canterbury, or Doruvernis, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> n., <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>churches of, xxii, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref> n., <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>see of, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> n., <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>monastery at, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>almost destroyed by fire, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>school of, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> n., <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> n., <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canterbury, Archbishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Anselm'>Anselm</ref>, <ref target='Index-Augustine'>Augustine</ref>, <ref target='Index-Bertwald'>Bertwald</ref>, <ref target='Index-Cuthbert-Archbishop'>Cuthbert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Deusdedit-Archbishop'>Deusdedit</ref>, <ref target='Index-Honorius-Archbishop'>Honorius</ref>, <ref target='Index-Justus'>Justus</ref>, <ref target='Index-Lanfranc'>Lanfranc</ref>, <ref target='Index-Laurentius-Archbishop'>Laurentius</ref>, <ref target='Index-Mellitus'>Mellitus</ref>, <ref target='Index-Nothelm'>Nothelm</ref>, <ref target='Index-Tatwine'>Tatwine</ref>, <ref target='Index-Theodore-Archbishop'>Theodore</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cantuarians, the, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cantuarii, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cantus Ambrosianus, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cantus Romanus, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cantyre, or Kintyre, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> n., <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caracalla, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Antonius-Bassianus'>Antonius Bassianus</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carausius, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carlegion, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Chester'>Chester</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Carlisle'/>
<l>Carlisle, Luel, or Lugubalia, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref> n., <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> n., <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carlisle, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Appleby'>Appleby</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Carloman'/>
<l>Carloman, King of the Franks, son of Charles Martel, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Carmen Paschale,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Sedulius'>Sedulius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carpophorus, St., <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carriden (probably Urbs Iudeu), <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref> n., <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cassobellaunus, chief of the Catuvellauni, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catterick Bridge, Cataract, or Cataractonium, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catuvellauni, the, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ceadda'/>
<l>Ceadda, or Chad, St., afterwards Bishop of Lichfield and York, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Abbot of Lastingham, <ref target='Pgxxxv'>xxxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consecrated Bishop of York in Wilfrid's place, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reconsecrated by Theodore, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref> n., <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Wilfrid's return retires to Lastingham, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made Bishop of Lichfield, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a disciple of Aidan, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his holy life, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>builds the monastery of Ad Barvae, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of his death, <ref target='Pgxxxviii'>xxxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried at Lichfield, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his posthumous miracles, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relics, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cearl'/>
<l>Cearl, King of Mercia, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ceaulin, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Caelin'>Caelin</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cecilia, St., <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='405'/><anchor id='Pg405'/>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cedd'/>
<l>Cedd, afterwards Bishop of Essex, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref> n., <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his mission to Mid-Anglia, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reconverts the East Saxons, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>excommunicates a <q>gesith</q> for his unlawful marriage, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rebukes King Sigbert and prophecies his death, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>baptizes King Suidhelm, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>visits Northumbria, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his self-imposed discipline, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>founds the monastery of Lastingham, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his brothers, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burial, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>trained at Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>posthumous miracle, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Whitby, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forsakes the Celtic Easter, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his spirit appears at the time of Ceadda's death, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celestine, or Celestinus, Pope, sends Palladius to the Irish, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> n., <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celtic Churches, <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-British'>British Church</ref>, <ref target='Index-Irish-Church'>Irish Church</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celtic Missions, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Celtic Scotland,</q> Skene's, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Skene'>Skene</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celts, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their observance of Easter, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n., <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Easter-Controversy'>Easter Controversy</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Centwine'/>
<l>Centwine, sub-king of Wessex, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref> n., <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his wife, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ceolfrid'/>
<l>Ceolfrid, Abbot of Wearmouth and Jarrow, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxv'>xxxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>educates Bede, <ref target='Pgxxxiii'>xxxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>enlarges the library of Wearmouth and Jarrow, <ref target='Pgxxxv'>xxxv</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Pope Sergius' letter to, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends builders to Naiton, King of the Picts, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his letter to Naiton (said to be written by Bede), <ref target='Pg360'>360-374</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ceollach'/>
<l>Ceollach, Bishop of Mid-Anglia and Mercia, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ceolred'/>
<l>Ceolred, King of Mercia, son of Ethelred, succeeds Coinred, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his bad character, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref> n., <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his enmity to Ethelbald, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ceolwulf'/>
<l>Ceolwulf, King of Northumbria, brother of Coenred, succeeds Osric, <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref> n., <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Ecclesiastical History</q> dedicated to, <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken prisoner, tonsured, and sent back to his kingdom, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leaves the kingdom to Eadbert, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cerdic'/>
<l>Cerdic, British King, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cerot, Island of, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cerotaesei, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Chertsey'>Chertsey</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chad, St., <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ceadda'>Ceadda</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chalcedon, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>council of, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref> n., <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chaldeans, the, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Charibert'/>
<l>Charibert, King of Paris, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref> n., <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Charles'/>
<l>Charles Martel, King of the Franks, defeats the Saracens, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supports Boniface's mission, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charybdis, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chauci, the, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Chelles'/>
<l>Chelles, or Cale, monastery of, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chepstow, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Chertsey'/>
<l>Chertsey, Cerotaesei, or the Island of Cerot, monastery of, <ref target='Pgxxviii'>xxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cherusci, the, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cheshire, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Chester'/>
<l>Chester, Carlegion, City of Legions, or Legacaestir, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Battle of, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Chester-le-Street'/>
<l>Chester-le-Street, or Cunungaceaster, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref> n., <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chichester, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> n., <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Childebert'/>
<l>Childebert, King of Austrasia and Burgundy, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Chilperic'/>
<l>Chilperic, King of Neustria, brother of Charibert, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Chosroes'/>
<l>Chosroes II, King of Persia, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chrism, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christ Church Cathedral, Canterbury, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christians, persecuted under Diocletian
<pb n='406'/><anchor id='Pg406'/>
and Maximian, <ref target='Pg014'>14-19</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>under Nero, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Christmas'/>
<l>Christmas, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Chronological Recapitulation of the whole Work,</q> <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Church Furniture, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Music, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Church Historians,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Stevenson'>Stevenson</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Churches of Wood, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of stone, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>covered with lead, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cilicia, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>City of Legions, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Caerleon'>Caerleon</ref> and <ref target='Index-Chester'>Chester</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Claudius, Emperor, invades Britain and conquers the Orkneys, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clement, St., <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clement, name given to Wilbrord, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n., <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clergy, rules for, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cliff-at-Hoe'/>
<l>Cliff-at-Hoe, Clofeshoch, or Clovesho, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> n., <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clonard, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clonard, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Colman-Columbanus'>Colman or Columbanus</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Clothaire-III'/>
<l>Clothaire III, King of Neustria, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clothilde, wife of Clovis I, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clovesho, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Cliff-at-Hoe'>Cliff-at-Hoe</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Clovis-I'/>
<l>Clovis I, King of the Franks, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Clovis-II'/>
<l>Clovis II, King of Neustria, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref> n., <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clyde, or Cluith, the river, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cnobheresburg, or Cnobhere's Town, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Burgh-Castle'>Burgh Castle</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Coenred-Coinred'/>
<l>Coenred, or Coinred, King of Mercia after Ethelred, son of Wulfhere, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his thegn's visions, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref>, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gives up his throne and goes to Rome, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>becomes a monk, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reconciled to Wilfrid, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Coenred-Northumbria'/>
<l>Coenred, King of Northumbria, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coenwald, Theodore's representative at Wilfrid's trial, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coifi, a pagan priest converted to Christianity, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Coinwalch'/>
<l>Coinwalch, King of Wessex, son of Cynegils, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in exile in East Anglia, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>puts away his wife, Penda's sister, and marries another, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>restored to his kingdom, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relations with Agilbert, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Coldingham-Coludi'/>
<l>Coldingham, or Coludi, monastery of, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> n., <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coldingham, Abbess of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aebba'>Aebba</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coldstream, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Colman'/>
<l>Colman, Bishop of Northumbria, <ref target='Pgxxviii'>xxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the Whitby Synod, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>returns to Ireland, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>takes some of Aidan's bones with him, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his frugality and plain living, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Iona, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Innisboffin, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Mayo, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Colman-Columbanus'/>
<l>Colman, or Columbanus, Irish bishop, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cologne, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coludi, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Coldingham-Coludi'>Coldingham</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Columba-Columcille'/>
<l>Columba, or Columcille, St., Bishop of Iona, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref> n., <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his mission to the Picts, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref> n., <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converts King Bridius, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his name, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> n., <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>founds the monastery of Iona, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>builds the monastery of Dearmach, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his rule and jurisdiction, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>records of him, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>miracles, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried at Iona, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Columba, St., Life of,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Adamnan-Iona'>Adamnan</ref> and <ref target='Index-Reeves'>Reeves</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Columban Monasteries, Egbert's mission to, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Columbanus, Irish missionary to the continent, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Columbanus, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Colman-Columbanus'>Colman</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Columcille, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Columba-Columcille'>Columba</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='407'/><anchor id='Pg407'/>

<lg>
<l>Comb sent by Boniface to Ethelberg, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Comets, <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Communion'/>
<l>Communion, Holy, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Compiegne'/>
<l>Compiègne, Royal Villa, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Conall'/>
<l>Conall, King of the Dalriadic Scots, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Confirmation, the rite of, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Connor, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Dima'>Dima</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conquest, the Norman, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conrad, Prior of Canterbury, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Constans-II'/>
<l>Constans II, or Constantine IV, Emperor, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constans, son of Constantine, Tyrant of Britain, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantine I, Pope, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantine the Great, Emperor, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>establishes Christianity, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>completes the Basilica of the Anastasis, and builds the Church of the Martyrium, Jerusalem, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantine III, Emperor, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantine IV, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Constans-II'>Constans II</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantine, Tyrant in Britain, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Constantinople'/>
<l>Constantinople, <ref target='Pgxxxviii'>xxxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref> n., <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Church at, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>councils of, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantinople, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Eudoxius'>Eudoxius</ref>, <ref target='Index-Macedonius'>Macedonius</ref>, <ref target='Index-Nestorius'>Nestorius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantinopolitan System of Indictions, the, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantius, father of Constantine the Great, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantius, Count, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantius Chlorus, Emperor, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Constantius-Lyons'/>
<l>Constantius of Lyons, his <q>Life of Germanus,</q> <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>editorial references to, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> n., <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> n., <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Continuation of Bede, the, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Conwulf'/>
<l>Conwulf, Bishop of Lindisfarne, after Ethelwald, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corinth, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corinthians, Epistle to the, quoted, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corman, his unsuccessful mission to the Northumbrians, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cornish Britons, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref> n., <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cornwall, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> n., <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corrib, Lough, monastery on, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Cotton MSS.,</q> <ref target='Pgxix'>xix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Councils'/>
<l>Councils, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> n., <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Constantinople'>Constantinople</ref>, <ref target='Index-Rome'>Rome</ref>, and <ref target='Index-Synods'>Synods</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cousins, marriage of, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cricklade, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crimea, the, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Croes Oswallt, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Oswalds-Tree'>Oswestry</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cromanus'/>
<l>Cromanus, or Cronan, Bishop of Nendrum, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cross, The, in procession, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sign of the, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Invention of the Holy, by Helena, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cross, erected by Oswald, at Hefenfelth, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cross at Maserfelth, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cudwald, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Cuthbald-Cudwald'>Cuthbald</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cuichelm-Wessex'/>
<l>Cuichelm, King of Wessex, son of Cynegils, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cuichelm-Rochester'/>
<l>Cuichelm, Bishop of Rochester after Putta, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cuiritin, Irish saint, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Culdees, The,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Reeves'>Reeves</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cunningham, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cunungaceaster, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Chester-le-Street'>Chester-le-Street</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cuthbald-Medeshamstead'/>
<l>Cuthbald, Abbot of Medeshamstead, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cuthbald-Cudwald'/>
<l>Cuthbald, or Cudwald, Abbot of Oundle, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cuthbert-Lindisfarne'/>
<l>Cuthbert, St., Bishop of Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxviii'>xxxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref> n., <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref> n., <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> n., <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> n., <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref> n., <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>history of, <ref target='Pg288'>288-295</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Farne, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Melrose, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>succeeds Boisil as Provost, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Ripon, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his consecration, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bishop of Hexham, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his friendship for Elfled, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>foretells Egfrid's defeat by the Picts, and death,
<pb n='408'/><anchor id='Pg408'/>
<ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> n., <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his vision, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his spiritual powers, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his missionary journeys, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his hermitage on Farne Island, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attends the Synod at Twyford, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his piety, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Carlisle, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>foretells his own death to Herebert, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried at Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his body preserved from corruption, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref> n., <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref>, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>removal of his relics, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref> n., <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>miracles, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref>, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Anonymous Life of, <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bede's Life of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Bede'>Bede</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cuthbert-Archbishop'/>
<l>Cuthbert, Archbishop of Canterbury after Nothelm, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> n., <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cuthbert-Wearmouth'/>
<l>Cuthbert, Abbot of Wearmouth and Jarrow, pupil of Bede, <ref target='Pgxxxix'>xxxix</ref>, <ref target='Pgxl'>xl</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his letter to Cuthwin describing Bede's death, <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxv'>xxxv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxix'>xxxix</ref>, <ref target='Pgxl'>xl-xliii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cuthred'/>
<l>Cuthred, King of Wessex, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cuthwin, <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxl'>xl</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cuthwine, father of Coenred, King of Northumbria, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cycles'/>
<l>Cycles, Paschal, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n., <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref>, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cyneburg'/>
<l>Cyneburg, St., daughter of Penda, wife of Alchfrid, Abbess of Caistor, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyneburga, daughter of Cynegils, wife of Oswald, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyneburgacaster, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Caistor'>Caistor</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cynegils'/>
<l>Cynegils, King of Wessex, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref> n., <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>baptized with all his people, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his daughter married to Oswald, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divides the West Saxon diocese, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cynibert-Lindsey'/>
<l>Cynibert, Bishop of Lindsey or Sidnacester, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cynibert-Redbridge'/>
<l>Cynibert, Abbot of Redbridge, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cynibill, brother of Cedd, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cynifrid, surgeon to Ethelthryth, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cynimund, a priest, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cyniwulf'/>
<l>Cyniwulf, King of Wessex, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cynwise, wife of Penda, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Cyril'/>
<l>Cyril, Archbishop of Alexandria, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> n., <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyrus, in Syria, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Theodoret'>Theodoret</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dacre, or Dacore, The Monastery of, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a monk of, miraculously cured of a tumour, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dacre, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Suidbert-Abbot'>Suidbert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Thruidred'>Thruidred</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dacre, The River, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Dagan'/>
<l>Dagan, Bishop of Inverdaeile, or Ennereilly, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Dagobert-I'/>
<l>Dagobert I, King of the Franks, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Dagobert-II'/>
<l>Dagobert II, King of Austrasia, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dal, Signification of, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dalfinus, Archbishop of Lyons, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Annemundus'>Annemundus</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Dalfinus-Count'/>
<l>Dalfinus, Count of Lyons, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> n., <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dalriada, the Dalreudini or Dalriadic Scots, history, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> n., <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dalriadic Scots, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Conall'>Conall</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dalston, near Carlisle, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Damascus, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Damian'/>
<l>Damian, or Damianus, Bishop of Rochester after Ithamar, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref> n., <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Danes, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their invasions of England, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> n., <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref> n., <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> n., <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref> n., <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Daniel'/>
<l>Daniel, Bishop of Winchester, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> n., <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Danube, The River, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darling, Grace, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>David, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dawstane Rig, Liddesdale, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='409'/><anchor id='Pg409'/>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Dearmach'/>
<l>Dearmach, Durrow, or Field of Oaks, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Decius, Emperor, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Deda'/>
<l>Deda, Abbot of Partney, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Degsastan, or Degsa Stone, Battle of, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>De Ingratis,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Prosper'>Prosper</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deira, History of, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> n., <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> n., <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref> n., <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diocese of, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Gregory's pun on the name, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deira, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aelli-Deira'>Aelli</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ethelfrid'>Ethelfrid</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ethelric'>Ethelric</ref>, <ref target='Index-Oidilwald'>Oidilwald</ref>, <ref target='Index-Osric-Deira'>Osric</ref>, <ref target='Index-Oswin-Deira'>Oswin</ref>, <ref target='Index-Yffi-Deira'>Yffi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deira, Sub-king of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aelfwine'>Aelfwine</ref>, <ref target='Index-Egfrid'>Egfrid</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deira, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Bosa'>Bosa</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>De Locis Sanctis,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Adamnan-Iona'>Adamnan</ref> and <ref target='Index-Bede'>Bede</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>De Mensura Orbis Terrae,</q> the author of, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Denisesburna, or The Brook of Denis, Battle of, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deogratias, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Derbyshire, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Derwent, the River (Cumberland), <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Derwent, the River (Durham), <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Derwent, the River (Yorkshire), <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Derwentwater, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deusdedit, Pope, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Deusdedit-Archbishop'/>
<l>Deusdedit, or Frithonas, Archbishop of Canterbury, after Honorius, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref> n., <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deusdedit, The name of, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deuteronomy, quoted, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Devils, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref>, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Devil's Water, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Devon and Cornwall, Kingdom of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Dumnonia'>Dumnonia</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diarmaid, Irish King, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Dictionary of Christian Antiquities,</q> referred to, vi, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Dictionary of Christian Biography,</q> referred to, <ref target='Pgvi'>vi</ref>, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref> n., <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> n., <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dicul, an Irish monk of Bosham, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dicull, one of Fursa's priests, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Dima'/>
<l>Dima, Bishop of Connor, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dinnaus, probably Dima, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Dinoot'/>
<l>Dinoot, Donatus, Dunawd or Dunod, Abbot of Bangor, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diocletian, Emperor, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dionysius Exiguus, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref> n., <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Discipline, Augustine's Questions and Gregory's Answers on, <ref target='Pg049'>49-64</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Diuma'/>
<l>Diuma, Bishop of Lindsey, Mercia, and Mid-Anglia, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accompanies Peada into Mid-Anglia, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burial, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divorce, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dolphins in Britain, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Domesday-Book, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dommoc, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Dunwich'>Dunwich</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Don, The River, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Donafeld, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Campodonum'>Campodonum</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Donatus, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Dinoot'>Dinoot</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doncaster (perhaps Campodonum), <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> n., <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dooms, of Edric, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Ethelbert, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Hlothere, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Ini, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> n., <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dorchester (Oxfordshire), See at, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> n., <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dorchester, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aetla'>Aetla</ref>, <ref target='Index-Agilbert'>Agilbert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Birinus'>Birinus</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dorsetshire, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dorubrevis, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Rochester'>Rochester</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doruvernis, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Canterbury'>Canterbury</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Double Procession of the Holy Spirit, Doctrine of, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doulting, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dreams, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Visions'>Visions</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Driffield, or Field of Deira, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drought, An excessive, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drythelm, a Northumbrian, his visions of Death, Hell and Judgement, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325-331</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>retires into the monastery of Melrose, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref>, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ducange, editorial references to, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref> n., <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> n., <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref> n., <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='410'/><anchor id='Pg410'/>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Dudden'/>
<l>Dudden, F. Homes, his <q>Gregory the Great,</q> editorial references to, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref> n., <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref> n., <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Dugdale'/>
<l>Dugdale's <q>Monasticon,</q> editorial references to, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> n., <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Dumbarton'/>
<l>Dumbarton, Alcluith, or Dúnbrettan, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Dumnonia'/>
<l>Dumnonia, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dumnonia, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Geraint-King'>Geraint</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dunawd, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Dinoot'>Dinoot</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dunbar, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dúnbrettan, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Dumbarton'>Dumbarton</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dunchad, Abbot of Iona, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dunnechtan, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Nechtansmere'>Nechtansmere</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dunnichen, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dunod, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Dinoot'>Dinoot</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Dunwich'/>
<l>Dunwich, or Dommoc, Diocese of, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> n., <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dunwich, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aecci'>Aecci</ref>, <ref target='Index-Aldbert'>Aldbert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Bisi'>Bisi</ref>, <ref target='Index-Boniface-Bertgils'>Boniface</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Durham, <ref target='Pgxl'>xl</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref> n., <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> n., <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref> n., <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cathedral, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Durham, Reginald of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Reginald'>Reginald</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Durrow, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Dearmach'>Dearmach</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dysentery, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eabae, daughter of Eanfrid, wife of Ethelwalch, baptized, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Eadbald'/>
<l>Eadbald, King of Kent, son of Ethelbert, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his wickedness, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marries his stepmother, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gives her up, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converted by Laurentius, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref> n., <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recalls Mellitus and Justus, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>builds the Church of the Mother of God, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his letters to Pope Boniface, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gives his sister in marriage to Edwin, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>welcomes Paulinus back to Kent, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Eadbert-Kent'/>
<l>Eadbert, King of Kent, son of Wictred, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Eadbert-Northumbria'/>
<l>Eadbert, King of Northumbria after Ceolwulf, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Eadbert-Lindisfarne'/>
<l>Eadbert, Bishop of Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref>, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>illness and death, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried with Cuthbert at Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>posthumous miracles, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Eadbert-Selsey'/>
<l>Eadbert, Abbot of Selsey, afterwards Bishop of Selsey, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eadbert, (unknown), slain, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eadbert, Mercian Chief, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Eadfrid-Lindisfarne'/>
<l>Eadfrid, Bishop of Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eadfrid, son of Edwin, baptized, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed by Penda, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eadgyth, a nun of Barking, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Eadhaed'/>
<l>Eadhaed, Bishop of Lindsey, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>translated to Ripon, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Eadwulf'/>
<l>Eadwulf, usurps the throne of Northumbria, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref> n., <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>besieges Bamborough, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eafa, Mercian Chief, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Eanfled'/>
<l>Eanfled, daughter of Edwin, wife of Oswy, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref> n., <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> n., <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her birth, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>baptism, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken by her mother and Paulinus into Kent, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>observes the Catholic Easter, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receives a cross from Pope Vitalian, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>befriends Wilfrid, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref>, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>joint Abbess of Whitby with her daughter Elfled, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> n., <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried at Whitby, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her relatives, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Eanfrid-Bernicia'/>
<l>Eanfrid, King of Bernicia, son of Ethelfrid, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Eanfrid-Hwiccas'/>
<l>Eanfrid, King of the Hwiccas, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eanred, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Eappa'/>
<l>Eappa, a priest of Wilfrid's, afterwards Abbot of Selsey, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Earconbert'/>
<l>Earconbert, King of Kent, son of Eadbald, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>suppresses idolatry, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends Wilfrid and Benedict Biscop to Rome, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Earcongota, daughter of Earconbert and granddaughter of Anna, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> n., <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Earconwald'/>
<l>Earconwald, St., Bishop of London, <ref target='Pgxxviii'>xxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Earpwald'/>
<l>Earpwald, King of East Anglia,
<pb n='411'/><anchor id='Pg411'/>
son of Redwald, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converted by Edwin, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain by Ricbert, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>East Angles, The, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>East Anglia, History of, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref> n., <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>establishment of Christianity in, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diocese of, <ref target='Pgxxviii'>xxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>East Anglia, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aldwulf-King'>Aldwulf</ref>, <ref target='Index-Anna'>Anna</ref>, <ref target='Index-Earpwald'>Earpwald</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ecgric'>Ecgric</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ethelhere'>Ethelhere</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ethelwald-Anglia'>Ethelwald</ref>, <ref target='Index-Redwald'>Redwald</ref>, <ref target='Index-Sigbert-Anglia'>Sigbert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Tytilus'>Tytilus</ref>, <ref target='Index-Uuffa'>Uuffa</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>East Anglia, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Bisi'>Bisi</ref>, <ref target='Index-Boniface-Bertgils'>Boniface</ref>, <ref target='Index-Thomas-Anglia'>Thomas</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Easter-Controversy'/>
<l>Easter Controversy, The, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxviii'>xxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxviii'>xxxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxix'>xxxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192-201</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>, <ref target='Pg359'>359-370</ref>, <ref target='Pg374'>374-376</ref>, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Easter kept twice in one year, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eastern Church, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Greek'>Greek</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>East Lothian, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>East Saxons, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diocese of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-London'>London</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>province of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Essex'>Essex</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Eata'/>
<l>Eata, Abbot of Melrose, afterwards Bishop of Hexham, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> n., <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> n., <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordained at York in Wilfrid's place, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bishop of Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> n., <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eata Glinmaur, father of Eadbert of Northumbria, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ebbsfleet, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ebchester, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ebroin'/>
<l>Ebroin, Mayor of the Palace to Clothaire III, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> n., <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>plots against Wilfrid, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> n., <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>detains Hadrian and Theodore, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>murdered, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Ecclesiastes,</q> quoted, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ecclesiastical Arithmetic, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ecclesiastical-History'/>
<l><q>Ecclesiastical History,</q> Bede's, MSS. of, <ref target='Pgxix'>xix</ref>, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sources of, <ref target='Pgxxi'>xxi</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>editions of, <ref target='Pgxix'>xix</ref>, <ref target='Pgxx'>xx</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>translations of, <ref target='Pgxx'>xx</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxi'>xxi</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref> n., <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>date of, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bede's own account of, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and <hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ecgric'/>
<l>Ecgric, King of East Anglia, after Sigbert, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eclanum, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Julianus'>Julianus</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eclipses of the Moon, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Sun, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Eddi'/>
<l>Eddi, or Eddius, surnamed Stephen, editorial references to, his <q>Life of Wilfrid,</q> <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> n., <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref> n., <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> n., <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> n., <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref> n., <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> n., <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref> n., <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref> n., <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref> n., <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref> n., <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref> n., <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> n., <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches the Northumbrians to sing in church, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edessa, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ibas'>Ibas</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Edgar'/>
<l>Edgar, Bishop of Lindsey, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Edilhart'/>
<l>Edilhart, King of Wessex, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edinburgh (perhaps Urbs Iudeu), <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref> n., <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edric, King of Kent, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Edwin'/>
<l>Edwin, King of Deira, afterwards of Northumbria, 5th Bretwalda, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n., <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his early history, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marries Ethelberg of Kent, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquers the Mevanian Islands, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his dominion, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his vision, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his conversion and baptism, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>allows his daughter to be baptized, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his children, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receives letters from Pope Honorius, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converts Earpwald, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Eumer's attack on his life, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his war against the West Saxons, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>builds St. Peter's, York, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bestows the see of York upon Paulinus, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marries Quenburga, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his glorious reign, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Caedwalla rebels against him, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeated and killed at the battle of Hatfield,
<pb n='412'/><anchor id='Pg412'/>
<ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref> n., <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried at Whitby, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref> n., <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his head laid in St. Gregory's Chapel in St. Peter's, York, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his Cross and Chalice preserved at Canterbury, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edwin's Cliff, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edwinspath, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ouestraefelda'>Ouestraefelda</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Egbert-York'/>
<l>Egbert, Bishop of York after Wilfrid II, afterwards Archbishop, pupil of Bede, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref> n., <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref> n., <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>founder of the School of York, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bede's <q>Epistola ad Ecgbertum</q> addressed to, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bede visits, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxix'>xxxix</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egbert, English monk in Ireland, probably bishop, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seized with the plague, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his vow and recovery, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his attempted mission to Frisland, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref> n., <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dissuaded by a revelation, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends Wilbrord instead, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>saved from shipwreck, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his good example, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his account of Ceadda's death, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>advises Egfrid against the war with the Scots, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his mission to the Columban monasteries, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, on Easter Day, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Egbert-King'/>
<l>Egbert, King of Kent, after Earconbert, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consults with Oswy on Church matters, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends Wighard to Rome, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends Raedfrid to meet Theodore, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Egfrid'/>
<l>Egfrid, King of Northumbria, son of Oswy, <ref target='Pgxxviii'>xxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref> n., <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> n., <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> n., <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hostage with Queen Cynwise, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeats Wulfhere and annexes Lindsey, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref> n., <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his conquests, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeated by Ethelred at the battle of the Trent, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reconciled to Ethelred by Theodore, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gives Benedict Biscop land for the monasteries of Wearmouth and Jarrow, <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his dispute with Wilfrid, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marries Ethelthryth, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relations with her, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>appoints Cuthbert Bishop of Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the Synod of Twyford, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the Synod of Hertford, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death foretold by Cuthbert, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> n., <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends an army to ravage Ireland, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his expedition against the Picts and Scots, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> n., <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeated and killed at the battle of Nechtansmere, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref> n., <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref> n., <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried at Iona, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Egwin'/>
<l>Egwin, St., Bishop of Worcester, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egypt, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>, <ref target='Pg362'>362</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>churches of, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egyptians, their skill in calculation, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elafius, British Chief, his son cured of his lameness by Germanus, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elbe, The river, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eleutherus, or Eleuther, Pope, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Elfled'/>
<l>Elfled, daughter of Oswy, dedicated to religion by her father, <ref target='Pgxxxiii'>xxxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>trained at Whitby, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>enters the Monastery of Hartlepool, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>joint Abbess of Whitby with her mother, Eanfled, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> n., <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> n., <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her friendship with Trumwine, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried at Whitby, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elford-on-Trent, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elfred the priest, carries Bede's bones to Durham, <ref target='Pgxl'>xl</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='413'/><anchor id='Pg413'/>

<lg>
<l>Elge, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ely'>Ely</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elizabeth, Queen, <q>The Ecclesiastical History,</q> translated for her benefit, <ref target='Pgxxi'>xxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ellmyn, Celtic name for the English, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elmet Wood, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elmham, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Badwin'>Badwin</ref>, <ref target='Index-Hadulac'>Hadulac</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ely'/>
<l>Ely, Isle of, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> n., <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Monastery of, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>St. Audrey's Fair at, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ely, Abbess of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ermingild'>Ermingild</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ethelthryth-St'>Ethelthryth</ref>, <ref target='Index-Sexburg-Anna'>Sexburg</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Emme'/>
<l>Emme, Emmo, or Haymo, Bishop of Sens, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ems, The, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>End of the World, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>English, The, come to Britain, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>idolatry among, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called Garmans, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Saxons, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ellmyn, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Church, <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>language, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>religious poetry, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>English Historical Review, The,</q> editorial reference to, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eni, father of Anna, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ennereilly, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Inver-Daeile'>Inver Daeile</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Eolla'/>
<l>Eolla, Bishop of Selsey, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eormenburg, second wife of Egfrid, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> n., <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>warned by Cuthbert of Egfrid's death, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Ephesians, Epistle to the,</q> quoted, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ephesus, Council of, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epigrams, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Epistola ad Ecgbertum,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Bede'>Bede</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epternach, Wilbrord's monastery at, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Equinox, the Vernal, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n., <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref>, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ercinwald'/>
<l>Ercinwald, Mayor of the Palace to Clovis II, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> n., <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ermingild'/>
<l>Ermingild, daughter of Sexburg, and wife of Wulfhere, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> n., <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Abbess of Ely and Sheppey, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ermynge'/>
<l>Ermynge, or Ixning, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erneshow, or Herneshaw, now St. John's Lee, Hexham, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ernianus, Irish priest, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esi, Abbot, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esquiline, The, Rome, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Essex'/>
<l>Essex, History of, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> n., <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref> n., <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diocese of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-London'>London</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Essex, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Offa-Essex'>Offa</ref>, <ref target='Index-Saba'>Sabert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Sebbi'>Sebbi</ref>, <ref target='Index-Sigbert-Good'>Sigbert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Sighard'>Sighard</ref>, <ref target='Index-Sighere'>Sighere</ref>, <ref target='Index-Suefred'>Suefred</ref>, <ref target='Index-Suidhelm'>Suidhelm</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Estrefeld, Council of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ouestraefelda'>Ouestraefelda</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Etaples'/>
<l>Etaples, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eternal punishment, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ethelbald'/>
<l>Ethelbald, King of Mercia, son of Alweo, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ravages Northumbria, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>murdered, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ethelberg-Brige'/>
<l>Ethelberg, daughter of Anna, Abbess of Brige, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> n., <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ethelberg-Tata'/>
<l>Ethelberg, or Tata, daughter of Ethelbert of Kent, wife of Edwin of Northumbria, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receives a letter and gifts from Pope Boniface, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her piety, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>after Edwin's death, returns with her children and Paulinus into Kent, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends Wusfrea and Yffi to King Dagobert, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ethelbert'/>
<l>Ethelbert, King of Kent, third Bretwalda, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his wife Bertha, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converted by St. Augustine, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receives a letter and gift from Gregory, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>builds St. Paul's, London, and St. Andrew's, Rochester, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>endows the bishoprics of London, Rochester and Canterbury, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receives a letter from Boniface, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of his reign, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his <q>dooms,</q> <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>;</l>
<pb n='414'/><anchor id='Pg414'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burial, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>genealogy, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his second wife marries his son Eadbald, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ethelbert, King of Kent, son of Wictred, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ethelburg'/>
<l>Ethelburg, St., sister of Earconwald, Abbess of Barking, <ref target='Pgxxviii'>xxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her miracles, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burial, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her spirit appears to Tortgyth, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Life of,</q> <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ethelfrid'/>
<l>Ethelfrid, King of Northumbria, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeats the Britons at Legacaestir, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeats the Scots at Degsastan, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his genealogy and reign, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his persecution of Edwin, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed in battle by Redwald, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his wives, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his sons, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ethelhere'/>
<l>Ethelhere, King of East Anglia, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> n., <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> n., <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> n., <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>occasions the war between Penda and Oswy, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain at the Winwaed, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ethelhild, Abbess, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ethelhun, son of Edwin, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ethelhun, brother of Ethelwin, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ethelred'/>
<l>Ethelred, King of Mercia, son of Penda, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref>, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> n., <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeats Egfrid at the battle of the Trent, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reconciled to Egfrid by Theodore, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recovers Lindsey, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref> n. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ravages Kent, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his veneration for Bardney Monastery, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>appoints Oftfor Bishop of Worcester, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reconciled to Wilfrid, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>resigns his throne to Coinred, and becomes a monk, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Abbot of Bardney, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reconciles Coinred to Wilfrid, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ethelric'/>
<l>Ethelric, King of Northumbria, son of Ida, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref> n., <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ethelthryth-St'/>
<l>Ethelthryth, St. (of Audrey), daughter of Anna, wife of Tondbert and of Egfrid, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> n., <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her history, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her virginity, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her virtues, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her gift of prophecy, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gives land for a church at Hexham, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>obtains a divorce and retires into the Monastery of Coldingham, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>founds the Monastery of Ely, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dies of a tumour, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her flesh preserved from corruption, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her posthumous miracles, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her bones translated by Sexburg, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bede's hymn in her honour, <ref target='Pg264'>264-267</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ethelthryth, daughter of Edwin, baptized, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ethelwalch'/>
<l>Ethelwalch, King of the South Saxons, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ethelwald-Deira'/>
<l>Ethelwald, or Oidilwald, sub-king of Deira, son of Oswald, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rebels against his uncle Oswy and supports Penda, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gives Cedd land for a monastery at Lastingham, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ethelwald-Anglia'/>
<l>Ethelwald, King of East Anglia, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ethelwald-Northumbria'/>
<l>Ethelwald, King of Northumbria after Oswulf, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ethelwald-Melrose'/>
<l>Ethelwald, Abbot of Melrose and Bishop of Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n., <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his gifts to Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ethelwald, Hermit, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ethelward, of the Hwiccas, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ethelwin'/>
<l>Ethelwin, Bishop of Lindsey, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ethelwulf, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ethilwin, Oswy's reeve, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eucharist, The, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Communion'>Communion</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eucherius, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Eudoxius'/>
<l>Eudoxius, heretic Bishop of Constantinople, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> n., <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eugenius I, Pope, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eulalia, St., <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='415'/><anchor id='Pg415'/>

<lg>
<l>Eumer, attempts to murder Edwin, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euphemia, St., <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Europe, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Eusebius-Pamphili'/>
<l>Eusebius Pamphili, Bishop of Caesarea, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eusebius, name in religion given to Huaetbert, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eutropius, quoted, <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eutyches, founder of Eutychianism, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref> n., <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref> n., <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eutychius, heretic patriarch of Constantinople, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eve, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Excommunication, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Excursus on Paschal Controversy,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Plummer'>Plummer</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Exodus,</q> quoted, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>, <ref target='Pg362'>362</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exorcism of Evil Spirits, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Ezekiel, Commentary on,</q> by Gregory, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Ezra,</q> <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fainéant, Roi, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Clothaire-III'>Clothaire III</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Famines, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Fara'/>
<l>Fara, or Burgundofara, foundress of the Monastery of Brige, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faremoûtier-en-Brie, or Farae Monasterium in Brige, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Brige'>Brige</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Farne'/>
<l>Farne, Isle of, or House Island, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Faro'/>
<l>Faro, or Burgundofarus, Bishop of Meaux, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fasting, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feliskirk, Yorkshire, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Felix, St., <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Felix III, Pope, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Felix IV, Pope, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Felix, Bishop of Dunwich, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his school, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Felixstowe, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fen Country, The, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fergus, father of Oengus, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Field-of-Oaks, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Dearmach'>Dearmach</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fina, mother of Aldfrid, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Finan'/>
<l>Finan, Bishop of Lindisfarne, after Aidan, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>baptizes Peada, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordains Diuma, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>baptizes Sigbert, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordains Cedd, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>builds a church at Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his controversy with Ronan on the Easter question, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Finchale, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fire, future punishment by, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fire of London, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fish of Britain, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fiskerton, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flintshire, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Florence of Worcester, editorial references to, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref> n., <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> n., <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> n., <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref> n., <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> n., <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> n., <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref> n., <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foillan, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Fullan'>Fullan</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Folcard, his Life of St. John of Beverley, editorial references to, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref> n., <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fontaines, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forfar, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> n., <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forth, the, or Sea of Giudan, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref> n., <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> n., <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> n., <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> n., <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Forthere-Sherborne'/>
<l>Forthere, Bishop of Sherborne after Aldhelm, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forthhere, Edwin's thegn, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Fortunatus'/>
<l>Fortunatus, Venantius, Bishop of Poitiers, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his <q>Praise of Virgins</q> quoted, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fosite, the god, son of Balder, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fosse, monastery of, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fosse, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ultan'>Ultan</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>France, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Franks, the, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their language, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Church of, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Gaul'>Gaul</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Franks, King of the, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Carloman'>Carloman</ref>, <ref target='Index-Charles'>Charles Martel</ref>, <ref target='Index-Charibert'>Charibert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Childebert'>Childebert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Chilperic'>Chilperic</ref>, <ref target='Index-Clothaire-III'>Clothaire III</ref>, <ref target='Index-Clovis-I'>Clovis</ref>, <ref target='Index-Dagobert-I'>Dagobert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Pippin-Short'>Pippin</ref>, <ref target='Index-Theodebert'>Theodebert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Theoderic'>Theoderic</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Franks, Duke of the, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Pippin-Heristal'>Pippin of Heristal</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Freeman'/>
<l>Freeman's <q>Norman Conquest,</q> editorial references to, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='416'/><anchor id='Pg416'/>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Frigyth'/>
<l>Frigyth, Prioress of Hackness, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frisia, or Frisland, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Wictbert's mission to, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquered by Pippin, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Wilbrord's mission to, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Wilfrid's mission in, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frisland, Archbishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Wilbrord'>Wilbrord</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frisland, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aldgils'>Aldgils</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frisland, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Suidbert-Abbot'>Suidbert</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Frithbert'/>
<l>Frithbert, Bishop of Hexham, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frithonas, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Deusdedit-Archbishop'>Deusdedit</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Frithwald'/>
<l>Frithwald, Bishop of Whitern, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Fullan'/>
<l>Fullan, or Foillan, brother of Fursa, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fuller, his story about Bede's epitaph, <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fünen, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Fursa'/>
<l>Fursa, St., <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg173'>173-178</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Fursa, Life of St.,</q> <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref> n., <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gaels, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Goidels'>Goidels</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Galatians, Epistle to the,</q> quoted, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Gallican Martyrology,</q> editorial reference to, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galloway, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garmans, English so-called by the Britons, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Gateshead-on-Tyne'/>
<l>Gateshead-on-Tyne, or At-the-Goat's Head, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gateshead, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Utta'>Utta</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Gaul'/>
<l>Gaul, history of, <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref> n., <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref> n., <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> n., <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Church of, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>schools of, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> n., <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gaul, Archbishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Annemundus'>Annemundus</ref>, <ref target='Index-Godwin'>Godwin</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gaul, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Arculf'>Arculf</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gauls, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Gebmund'/>
<l>Gebmund, Bishop of Rochester, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genesis, quoted, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref>, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genlade, the river, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genoa, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Asterius-Genoa'>Asterius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Geraint-Gerontius'/>
<l>Geraint, or Gerontius, Count, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Geraint-King'/>
<l>Geraint, or Gerontius, King of Dumnonia, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> n., <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Germans, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Germanus, Bishop of Auxerre, sent to Britain to confute the Pelagians, <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref> n., <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>church dedicated to, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stills a tempest, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>casts out evil spirits, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converts the heretics, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>heals a blind girl, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at St. Alban's tomb, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quenches a fire, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>healed of lameness by a vision, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assists the Britons in battle, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>goes to Ravenna, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Duke of Armorica, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>returns to Britain, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Germanus, Life of,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Constantius-Lyons'>Constantius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Germany, <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>English missions to, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gerontius, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Geraint-Gerontius'>Geraint</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gertrude, St., <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gessoriacum, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Boulogne'>Boulogne</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geta, son of Severus, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gewissae, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-West-Saxons'>West Saxons</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gidley, Rev. L., his translation of the <q>Ecclesiastical History,</q> <ref target='Pgxxi'>xxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gildas, historian, editorial references to, <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> n., <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref> n., <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref> n., <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his <q>De Excidio Liber Querulus,</q> quoted, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Giles, Dr., his translation of the <q>Ecclesiastical History,</q> <ref target='Pgv'>v</ref>, <ref target='Pgxx'>xx</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxi'>xxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gilling, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gilling, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Trumhere'>Trumhere</ref>, <ref target='Index-Tunbert'>Tunbert</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Giudan, Sea of, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, Firth of Forth, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Giudi (probably Inchkeith), <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Glen, the river, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Glendale, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gloucestershire, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goat's Head, At the, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Gateshead-on-Tyne'>Gateshead</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='417'/><anchor id='Pg417'/>

<lg>
<l>Gobban, one of Fursa's priests, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Godmunddingham'/>
<l>Godmunddingaham, or Goodmanham, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Godwin'/>
<l>Godwin, Archbishop of Lyons, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Godwine, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Goidels'/>
<l>Goidels, or Gaels, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref> n., <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Golgotha, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref> n., <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goodmanham, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Godmunddingham'>Godmunddingaham</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gordianus, father of Gregory, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gore's <q>Bampton Lectures,</q> editorial references to, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref> n., <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goths, The, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grampians, the, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grantacaestir, or Grantchester, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gratian, Emperor, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain by Maximus, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gratian, or Gratianus, tyrant in Britain, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greece, churches of, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Greek'/>
<l>Greek, or Eastern Church, practices of the, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Green'/>
<l>Green, J. R., his <q>Making of England,</q> editorial references to, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> n., <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n., <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregorian Music, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> n., <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Gregorian Sacramentary,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Liber-Sacramentorum'><q>Liber Sacramentorum.</q></ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Gregory-Great'/>
<l>Gregory the Great, St., Pope, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxviii'>xxxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> n., <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref> n., <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> n., <ref target='Pg075'>75-83</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his genealogy, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his character, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his pontificate, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sent to Constantinople, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>confutes the heresy of Eutychius, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his learning and literary works, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his connection with Church music, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his meeting with the Anglian slaves, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends Augustine on a mission to Britain to convert the English, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letter recommending Augustine and Candidus to Aetherius, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letters to Augustine and the English mission, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letter to Vergilius, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letter to Mellitus, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends the pall to Augustine, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>letter to Ethelbert, <ref target='Pg069'>69-72</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his gifts to Ethelbert, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his answers to Augustine's questions on discipline, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49-63</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n., <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>private letters, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends Paulinus to Britain, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his weak health, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burial, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>epitaph, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>altar dedicated to him at SS. Peter and Paul's, Canterbury, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quoted, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref>, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his disciples, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lives of, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref> n., <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Dudden'>Dudden</ref>, <ref target='Index-Whitby-Monk'>Whitby</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregory, St., Martyr, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregory II, Pope, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregory III, Pope, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guest, editorial reference to, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Guthfrid'/>
<l>Guthfrid, Abbot of Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guthlac, St., his Hermitage, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gwynedd, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Caedwalla-Cadwallon'>Caedwalla</ref>, <ref target='Index-Cadvan'>Cadvan</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Habakkuk, quoted, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Habetdeus, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hackness, or Hacanos, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hackness, Abbess of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Hilda'>Hilda</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hackness, Prioress of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Frigyth'>Frigyth</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Haddan-Stubbs'/>
<l>Haddan and Stubbs, <q>Councils and Ecclesiastical Documents,</q> editorial references to, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n., <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref> n., <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref> n., <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref> n., <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> n., <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref> n., <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n., <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref> n., <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref> n., <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haddenham, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hades, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref>, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref>, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hadrian, Pope, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hadrian, Emperor, his wall, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> n., <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref> n., <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Hadrian-Abbot'/>
<l>Hadrian, Abbot of Niridanum and later of St. Augustine's Monastery,
<pb n='418'/><anchor id='Pg418'/>
Canterbury, <ref target='Pgxxviii'>xxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> n., <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n., <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>refuses the English Archbishopric, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recommends Andrew, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recommends Theodore, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> n., <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accompanies Theodore on his journey to Britain, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> n., <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>detained by Ebroin at Quentavic, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his arrival in Britain, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made Abbot of St. Augustine's, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his learning, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accompanies Theodore in his pastoral visitations, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried in St. Augustine's, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Hadulac'/>
<l>Hadulac, Bishop of Elmham, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Haedde'/>
<l>Haedde, Bishop of Winchester after Leutherius, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed to be identical with Aetla, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his character, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>resists Bertwald's division of the Bishopric, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>posthumous miracles, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haemgils, a monk, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Haethfelth-Chase'/>
<l>Haethfelth (Hatfield Chase, near Doncaster), Battle of, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haethfelth (Hatfield, Hertfordshire), Synod of, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hagustald, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Hexham'>Hexham</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hallelujah, or Allelujah, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hallelujah victory of Germanus, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hallington, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Halydene, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Hamble'/>
<l>Hamble, or Homelea, The River, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hampshire, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref> n., <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harold, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Hartlepool'/>
<l>Hartlepool, Heruteu, or the Island of the Hart, Monastery at, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hartlepool, Abbess of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Heiu'>Heiu</ref>, <ref target='Index-Hilda'>Hilda</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Hateful Year, The,</q> in Northumbria, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hatfield, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Haethfelth-Chase'>Haethfelth</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hatfield Chase, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Haethfelth-Chase'>Haethfelth</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haverfield, editorial reference to, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haymo, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Emme'>Emme</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Healaugh, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heavenly Field, the, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Hefenfelth'>Hefenfelth</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Hebrews, The Epistle to the,</q> quoted, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hebron, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hecana, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Hereford'>Hereford</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Hedda'/>
<l>Hedda, Bishop of Lichfield, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Hefenfelth'/>
<l>Hefenfelth, or The Heavenly Field, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Heiu'/>
<l>Heiu, first Northumbrian nun, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>founds the monastery of Hartlepool, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>retires to Calcaria, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her gravestone, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Helen, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Helena, mother of Constantine, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legality of her marriage, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her Finding of the True Cross, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heliand, The, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heligoland, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hell, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref>, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hengist, leader of the Anglo-Saxons, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> n., <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henry VIII, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heracleonas, or Heraclius, Emperor, son of Heraclius, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heraclius, Emperor, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herbert, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Herebert'>Herebert</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Herebald'/>
<l>Herebald, Abbot of Tynemouth, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref>, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Herebert'/>
<l>Herebert, St., a hermit, the friend of Cuthbert, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Hereford'/>
<l>Hereford, See of, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hereford, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Putta-Hereford'>Putta</ref>, <ref target='Index-Tyrhtel'>Tyrhtel</ref>, <ref target='Index-Torthere'>Torthere</ref>, <ref target='Index-Wahlstod'>Wahlstod</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herefrid, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hereric, nephew of Edwin, and father of Hilda, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>poisoned by Cerdic, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heresuid, sister of Hilda, and wife of Ethelhere, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Heriburg'/>
<l>Heriburg, Abbess of Watton, her daughter healed by John of
<pb n='419'/><anchor id='Pg419'/>
Beverley's prayers, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermit, a British, lays a trap for Augustine, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Hertford'/>
<l>Hertford, Synod of, <ref target='Pgxxviii'>xxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hertfordshire, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> n., <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> n., <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heruteu, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Hartlepool'>Hartlepool</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herutford, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Hertford'>Hertford</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hewalds, The Two (Black and White), martyrs, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref>, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Hexham'/>
<l>Hexham, or Hagustald, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref> n., <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n., <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diocese of, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref> n., <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hexham, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Acca'>Acca</ref>, <ref target='Index-Eata'>Eata</ref>, <ref target='Index-Frithbert'>Frithbert</ref>, <ref target='Index-John-Beverley'>John</ref>, <ref target='Index-Tunbert'>Tunbert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Wilfrid-St'>Wilfrid</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hiddila, priest to Bernwin, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hii, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Iona'>Iona</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hilarus, arch-presbyter, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Hilda'/>
<l>Hilda, St., daughter of Hereric, Abbess of Hartlepool and afterwards of Whitby, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of her life, <ref target='Pg270'>270-275</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>builds the monastery of Streanaeshalch or Whitby, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her attitude on the Easter question, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her opposition to Wilfrid, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her character, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her pupils, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>illness and death, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>friendship for Aidan, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hildilid, pupil of Aldhelm, Abbess of Barking after Ethelburg, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>History of the Abbots,</q> Anonymous, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Abbots'>Abbots</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bede's, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Bede'>Bede</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Hlothere'/>
<l>Hlothere, King of Kent after Egbert, <ref target='Pgxxviii'>xxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Edric's revolt against, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>grants Bertwald land in Thanet, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holder, editor of the <q>Ecclesiastical History,</q> <ref target='Pgxx'>xx</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holmhurst, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holy Island, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Lindisfarne'>Lindisfarne</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holy Housel, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homelea, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Hamble'>Hamble</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Honorius, Emperor, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Honorius, Pope, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref> n., <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends the Pall to Paulinus, and to Archbishop Honorius, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his letters, <ref target='Pg124'>124-130</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends Birinus to the West Saxons, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Honorius-Archbishop'/>
<l>Honorius, Archbishop of Canterbury after Justus, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordained by Paulinus, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receives the Pall from Pope Honorius, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends Felix to East Anglia, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a disciple of Pope Gregory, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horsa, brother of Hengist, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horse, miraculously cured at Oswald's death-place, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horsted, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>House Island, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Farne'>Farne</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hreutford, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Redbridge'>Redbridge</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hrof, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hrofaescaestrae, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Rochester'>Rochester</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Huaetbert'/>
<l>Huaetbert, Abbot of Wearmouth and Jarrow, <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxl'>xl</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huddersfield, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hugh de Puisac, erects a shrine at Durham, for the bones of Bede and others, <ref target='Pgxl'>xl</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hull, The River, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Humber, The River, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> n., <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hunt, Dr., his <q>History of the English Church,</q> editorial references to, vi, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huntingdonshire, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huns, The, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hunwald, betrays Oswin, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hurst, W., his translation of the <q>Ecclesiastical History,</q> <ref target='Pgxxi'>xxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hussey, his edition of the <q>Ecclesiastical History,</q> <ref target='Pgxx'>xx</ref>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hwiccas, The, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diocese of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Worcester'>Worcester</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hwiccas, King of the, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aenhere'>Aenhere</ref>, <ref target='Index-Eanfrid-Hwiccas'>Eanfrid</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hwiccas, sub-king of the, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Osric-Hwiccas'>Osric</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Hygbald'/>
<l>Hygbald, Abbot of Bardney, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hymns, <ref target='Pg264'>264-267</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='420'/><anchor id='Pg420'/>

<lg>
<l>I (Iona), <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ibas'/>
<l>Ibas, Bishop of Edessa, his heresy, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> n., <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ida'/>
<l>Ida, first King of Bernicia, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref> n., <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>founds Bamborough, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> n., <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Idle, the Battle of the, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Idols, destruction of, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ii (Iona), <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Imma, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Immersion, Single, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Immin, Mercian chief, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Importunus'/>
<l>Importunus, Bishop of Paris, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>In Berecingum, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Barking'>Barking</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>In Brige, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Brige'>Brige</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>In Compendio, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Compiegne'>Compiègne</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Incuneningum, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inderauuda, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-John-Beverley'>John of Beverley</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indictions, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indulgences, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infeppingum, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ingetlingum, monastery of, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ingwald'/>
<l>Ingwald, Bishop of London, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ingyruum, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>, and <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Jarrow'>Jarrow</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inhrypum, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ripon'>Ripon</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ini'/>
<l>Ini, or Ine, King of Wessex after Caedwalla, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquers Sussex, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his <q>Dooms,</q> <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> n., <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Aldhelm's influence with, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his abdication and pilgrimage to Rome, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inisboufinde, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Innisboffin'>Innisboffin</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inishmahee, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Cromanus'>Cronan</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inlade, the river, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inlitore, now Kaiserwerth, Monastery at, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Innisboffin'/>
<l>Innisboffin, Inisboufinde, or The Island of the White Heifer, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Intiningaham, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Tininghame'>Tininghame</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inundalum, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Oundle'>Oundle</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Inver-Daeile'/>
<l>Inver Daeile, or Ennereilly, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Dagan'>Dagan</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inverness, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Iona'/>
<l>Iona, Hii, I or Ii, the island of, included in Ireland, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> n., <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref> n., <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>given to Columba by Bridius or by Conall, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its monastery founded by Columba, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its constitution and jurisdiction, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref> n., <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref> n., <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its monks converted to Catholic usages, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxix'>xxxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>piety of its Abbots, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>derivation of the name, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iona, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Adamnan-Iona'>Adamnan</ref>, <ref target='Index-Columba-Columcille'>Columba</ref>, <ref target='Index-Segeni'>Segeni</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ireland'/>
<l>Ireland, History of, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref> n., <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref> n., <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>description of, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its hospitality to the English monks, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Irish, or Scots, Bishop of the, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Palladius'>Palladius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Irish Annals, editorial reference to, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Irish-Church'/>
<l>Irish Church, <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxix'>xxxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref> n., <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> n., <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193-201</ref>, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, <ref target='Pg374'>374-377</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Irminric'/>
<l>Irminric, father of Ethelbert, King of Kent, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isaac, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his tomb, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isaiah, quoted, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ishmael, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isle of Wight, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Wight'>Wight</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Israel, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Itala, the, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref>, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Italian Sea, the, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Italy, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> n., <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Itchen, the river, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ithamar'/>
<l>Ithamar, Bishop of Rochester, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref> n., <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iudeu, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref> n., <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ixning, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ermynge'>Ermynge</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jacobsburgh, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Akeburg'>Akeburgh</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jacob's Tomb, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>James, St., quoted, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>James the Less, St., <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='421'/><anchor id='Pg421'/>

<lg>
<l>James the Deacon, companion of Paulinus, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>left at York when Paulinus flees into Kent, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a village named after him, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches Church music, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>observes the Catholic Easter, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Whitby, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Jarrow'/>
<l>Jarrow, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Wearmouth-Jarrow'>Wearmouth and Jarrow</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jarrow, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Benedict-Biscop'>Benedict Biscop</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ceolfrid'>Ceolfrid</ref>, <ref target='Index-Huaetbert'>Huaetbert</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Jaruman'/>
<l>Jaruman, Bishop of Mercia, <ref target='Pgxxviii'>xxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref> n., <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his mission to the East Saxons, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jerome, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> n., <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jerusalem, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jet, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jezebel, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Job, quoted, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his tonsure, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Commentary on,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Gregory-Great'>Gregory</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John the Baptist, St., his martyrdom, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John the Deacon, author of <q>Life of Gregory,</q> <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref> n., <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref> n., <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John the Evangelist, St., <ref target='Pgxlii'>xlii</ref>, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his celebration of Easter, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quoted, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John IV, Pope, consecrated, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his letter to the Scots, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John VI, Pope, Wilfrid's cause tried before, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-John-Arles'/>
<l>John, Archbishop of Arles, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John, Chief of the Papal notaries, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-John-Beverley'/>
<l>John of Beverley, Bishop of Hexham after Eata, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a pupil of Hilda, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Theodore, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>appointed Bishop of York, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordains Bede, <ref target='Pgxxxiii'>xxxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his miracles, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref>, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Erneshow, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Watton, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consecrates churches, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>resigns the bishopric of York and retires to Beverley, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordains his successor, Wilfrid II, Bishop of York, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref>, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried at St. Peter's, Beverley, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref>, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John, a martyr, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-John-Precentor'/>
<l>John, the precentor, brought into Britain to teach Church music, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Abbot of St. Martin's Monastery, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the Synod of Haethfelth, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dies on his way back to Rome, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried at Tours, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jonah, quoted, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joseph, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref> n., <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Julianus'/>
<l>Julianus of Campania, heretic Bishop of Eclanum, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Julius, British martyr, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Julius Caesar, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Caesar'>Caesar</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justin II, Emperor, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justinian I, Emperor, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref> n., <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justinian II, Emperor, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Justus'/>
<l>Justus, Bishop of Rochester, afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sent by Gregory to Augustine, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>takes refuge in Gaul, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordains Romanus Bishop of Rochester, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordains Paulinus, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends Romanus on a mission to Pope Honorius, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jutes, the, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> n., <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jutland, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaelcacaestir, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Calcaria'>Calcaria</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaiserswerth, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Katwyk, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kent, history, <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> n., <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref> n., <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> n., <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> n., <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>language of, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>settlement of Christianity in, <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diocese of, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Canterbury'>Canterbury</ref> and <ref target='Index-Rochester'>Rochester</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kent, king of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Alric'>Alric</ref>, <ref target='Index-Eadbert-Kent'>Eadbert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Earconbert'>Earconbert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Egbert-King'>Egbert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ethelbert'>Ethelbert</ref>,
<pb n='422'/><anchor id='Pg422'/>
<ref target='Index-Hlothere'>Hlothere</ref>, <ref target='Index-Irminric'>Irminric</ref>, <ref target='Index-Mul'>Mul</ref>, <ref target='Index-Octa'>Octa</ref>, <ref target='Index-Oeric'>Oeric</ref>, <ref target='Index-Suaebhard'>Suaebhard</ref>, <ref target='Index-Wictred'>Wictred</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kerslake, T., his <q>Vestiges of the Supremacy of Mercia,</q> editorial reference to, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kyle, Plain of, conquered by Eadbert, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Labienus, the Tribune, slain in battle with the Britons, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laestingaeu, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Lastingham'>Lastingham</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Lagny'/>
<l>Lagny-on-the-Marne, or Latineacum, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laistranus, Irish priest, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lammermuir Hills, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lancashire, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Lanfranc'/>
<l>Lanfranc, Archbishop, rebuilds Canterbury Cathedral, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Langres, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laodicea, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Anatolius'>Anatolius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Lastingham'/>
<l>Lastingham, or Laestingaeu, Monastery of, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxv'>xxxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lastingham, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ceadda'>Ceadda</ref>, <ref target='Index-Cedd'>Cedd</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lateran Councils, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref> n., <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Latin Language, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>poetry, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Latineacum, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Lagny'>Lagny</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laurentius, St., Deacon and Martyr, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Laurentius-Archbishop'/>
<l>Laurentius, second Archbishop of Canterbury, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref> n., <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sent by Augustine to Gregory, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consecrates the Church of SS. Peter and Paul, Canterbury, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his letters to the Scots and Britons, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rebuked and scourged by St. Peter in a dream, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converts King Eadbald, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death and burial, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leah's Tomb, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref> n., <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Leeds'/>
<l>Leeds, or Loidis, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leeds, or Loidis and Elmet, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Cerdic'>Cerdic</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Legacaestir, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Chester'>Chester</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Legions, City of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Chester'>Chester</ref> and <ref target='Index-Caerleon'>Caerleon-on-Usk</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leicester, Diocese of, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> n., <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leicester, Bishop of, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leicestershire, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leinster, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> n., <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> n., <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lent, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leptis in Tripolis, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lérins, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Leutherius'/>
<l>Leutherius, or Hlothere, Bishop of Wessex, nephew of Agilbert, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consecrated by Theodore, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the Hertford Synod, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordains Aldhelm, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leviticus, quoted <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Liber-Sacramentorum'/>
<l><q>Liber Sacramentorum,</q> or Gregorian Sacramentary, attributed to Gregory, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Liber Eliensis,</q> editorial reference to, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Lichfield'/>
<l>Lichfield, Diocese of, <ref target='Pgxxviii'>xxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cathedral, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lichfield, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aldwin-Worr'>Aldwin</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ceadda'>Ceadda</ref>, <ref target='Index-Hedda'>Hedda</ref>, <ref target='Index-Sexwulf'>Sexwulf</ref>, <ref target='Index-Wynfrid'>Wynfrid</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liddesdale, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liège, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Light, Supernatural, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lilla, gives his life for Edwin's, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lincoln, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lincolnshire, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> n., <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> n., <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n., <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lindisfari, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Lindisfarne'/>
<l>Lindisfarne, or Holy Island, Monastery of, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> n., <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Church of, <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diocese of, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n., <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> n., <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> n., <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lindisfarne, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aidan'>Aidan</ref>, <ref target='Index-Guthfrid'>Guthfrid</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lindisfarne, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aidan'>Aidan</ref>, <ref target='Index-Colman'>Colman</ref>, <ref target='Index-Conwulf'>Conwulf</ref>, <ref target='Index-Cuthbert-Lindisfarne'>Cuthbert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Eadbert-Lindisfarne'>Eadbert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Eadfrid-Lindisfarne'>Eadfrid</ref>, <ref target='Index-Eata'>Eata</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ethelwald-Melrose'>Ethelwald</ref>, <ref target='Index-Finan'>Finan</ref>, <ref target='Index-Tuda'>Tuda</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lindsey, history, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref> n., <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n., <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> n., <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diocese of, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='423'/><anchor id='Pg423'/>

<lg>
<l>Lindsey, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Alwic'>Alwic</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ceadda'>Ceadda</ref>, <ref target='Index-Cynibert-Lindsey'>Cynibert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Diuma'>Diuma</ref>, <ref target='Index-Eadhaed'>Eadhaed</ref>, <ref target='Index-Edgar'>Edgar</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ethelwin'>Ethelwin</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Linlithgow, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Littleborough, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Liudhard'/>
<l>Liudhard, Bishop, Chaplain to Bertha, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loidis, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Leeds'>Leeds</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lombards, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>King of the, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Perctarit'>Perctarit</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-London'/>
<l>London, metropolis of the East Saxons, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diocese of, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> n., <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>London, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Earconwald'>Earconwald</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ingwald'>Ingwald</ref>, <ref target='Index-Mellitus'>Mellitus</ref>, <ref target='Index-Waldhere'>Waldhere</ref>, <ref target='Index-Wini'>Wini</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Looking-glass, sent by Pope Boniface to Queen Ethelberg, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lord's Day, the, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lothians, the, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Louth, County, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Lucius-Britain'/>
<l>Lucius, King of Britain, his conversion, <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> n., <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucius Bibulus, Consul, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucius Verus, Emperor, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aurelius'>Aurelius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lugubalia, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Carlisle'>Carlisle</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luke, St., quoted, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Lul'/>
<l>Lul, Archbishop of Mainz, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Lupus'/>
<l>Lupus, Bishop of Troyes, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sent to Britain to confute the Pelagians, <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>churches dedicated to, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>casts out evil spirits, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luxeuil, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lyccidfelth, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Lichfield'>Lichfield</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lyons, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lyons, Archbishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aetherius'>Aetherius</ref>, <ref target='Index-Annemundus'>Annemundus</ref>, <ref target='Index-Godwin'>Godwin</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lyons, Count of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Dalfinus-Count'>Dalfinus</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maas, the, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Maban'/>
<l>Maban, or Mafa, a teacher of Church music, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macedonia, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Macedonius'/>
<l>Macedonius, Heretic Bishop of Constantinople, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> n., <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maelduib, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Maildufus'>Maildufus</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maeldum, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Meaux'>Meaux</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maelmin, Northumbria, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maestricht, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maes-y-Garmon, or Field of Germanus, said to be the scene of the Hallelujah Victory, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mafa, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Maban'>Maban</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mageo, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Mayo'>Mayo</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Maildufus'/>
<l>Maildufus, or Maelduib founds the Monastery of Malmesbury, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n., <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mailros, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Melrose'>Melrose</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maintz, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Boniface-Bertgils'>Boniface</ref>, <ref target='Index-Redger'>Redger</ref>, <ref target='Index-Lul'>Lul</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Making of England, The,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Green'>Green</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malachi, quoted, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malmesbury, or City of Maildufus, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps Augustine's Ác, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malmesbury, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aldhelm'>Aldhelm</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malmesbury, William of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-William'>William</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mamre, Hill of, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Man, Isle of, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Mevanian'>Mevanian Islands</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mandubracius, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Androgius'>Androgius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcellinus, his <q>Life of Suidbert,</q> <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcian, Emperor, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcus, Emperor in Britain, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcus Antoninus Verus, or Marcus Aurelius, Emperor, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marigena, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Pelagius'>Pelagius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mark, St., quoted, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his observance of Easter, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Market Weighton, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maro (Vergil), <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marriage, of the lower clergy, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lawful and unlawful, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>customs of, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rules and discipline of, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marseilles, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martial, editorial reference to, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Martin-Tours'/>
<l>Martin, St., Bishop of Tours, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> n., <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martin, Pope, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='424'/><anchor id='Pg424'/>

<lg>
<l>Martyrium Church at Jerusalem, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Martyrology,</q> Bede's, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Bede'>Bede</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martyrs, Church of the Four Crowned, Canterbury, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mary, the Virgin, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>churches of, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maserfelth, Battle of, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Masses, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Communion'>Communion</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Mason'/>
<l>Mason, Dr., his <q>Mission of St. Augustine,</q> editorial references to, <ref target='Pgvi'>vi</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matthew, St., quoted, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matthew of Westminster, editorial reference to, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maurice, or Mauritius, Emperor, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maximian, surnamed Herculius, Emperor, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maximus, Emperor in Britain, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Mayo'/>
<l>Mayo, Mageo or Muigeo, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> n., <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mayor and Lumby's edition of Books III and IV of the <q>Ecclesiastical History,</q> editorial references to, <ref target='Pgvi'>vi</ref>, <ref target='Pgxx'>xx</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxv'>xxxv</ref> n., <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref> n., <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mayor of the Palace, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ebroin'>Ebroin</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ercinwald'>Ercinwald</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meanware, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Meaux'/>
<l>Meaux, or Maeldum, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meaux, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Faro'>Faro</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Medeshamstead, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Peterborough'>Peterborough</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Medeshamstead, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Cuthbald-Medeshamstead'>Cuthbald</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meilochon, father of Bridius, King of the Picts, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meldi, the, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melfont, or Mellifont, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Mellitus'/>
<l>Mellitus, Bishop of London and afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury, sent by Gregory to Augustine, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> n., <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>goes to Rome, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expelled by the East Saxons, takes refuge with Justus in Gaul, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>returns from Gaul, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>succeeds Laurentius as Archbishop of Canterbury, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>suffers from gout, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death and burial, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his character, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Melrose'/>
<l>Melrose, or Mailros, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> n., <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melrose, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Eata'>Eata</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ethelwald-Melrose'>Ethelwald</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Provost of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Boisil'>Boisil</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menapia, Belgium, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meon, East and West, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meonstoke, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mercia, history of, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> n., <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n., <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> n., <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> n., <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> n., <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref> n., <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its conversion, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxviii'>xxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diocese of, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> n., <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> n., <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> n., <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n., <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> n., <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> n., <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref> n., <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mercia, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Beornred'>Beornred</ref>, <ref target='Index-Cearl'>Cearl</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ceolred'>Ceolred</ref>, <ref target='Index-Coenred-Coinred'>Coenred</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ethelbald'>Ethelbald</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ethelred'>Ethelred</ref>, <ref target='Index-Offa-Mercia'>Offa</ref>, <ref target='Index-Penda'>Penda</ref>, <ref target='Index-Wulfhere'>Wulfhere</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mercia, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aldwin-Worr'>Aldwin</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ceadda'>Ceadda</ref>, <ref target='Index-Jaruman'>Jaruman</ref>, <ref target='Index-Sexwulf'>Sexwulf</ref>, <ref target='Index-Wilfrid-St'>Wilfrid</ref>, <ref target='Index-Wynfrid'>Wynfrid</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>and see</hi> <ref target='Index-Mid-Anglia'>Mid-Anglia</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mercians, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Merivale, editorial reference to, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Metals of Britain, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Metrical Art, the, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Mevanian'/>
<l>Mevanian Islands (Man and Anglesea), conquered by Edwin, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michael, the Archangel, appears to Wilfrid in a dream, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Mid-Anglia'/>
<l>Mid-Anglia, conversion of, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mid-Anglia and Mercia, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Diuma'>Diuma</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ceollach'>Ceollach</ref>, <ref target='Index-Trumhere'>Trumhere</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Middlesex, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milan, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milan, Archbishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Asterius-Genoa'>Asterius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='425'/><anchor id='Pg425'/>

<lg>
<l>Millfield (perhaps Maelmin), <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miracles, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxix'>xxxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Aidan, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Augustine, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Cedd, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Cuthbert, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Earcongota, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Earconwald, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Ethelthryth, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Ethelwald, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Haedde, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Hewalds, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of John of Beverley, <ref target='Pg302'>302-311</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Oswald, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg154'>154-160</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Paulinus, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Sebbi, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miracles, Gregory on, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Mission of St. Augustine,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Mason'>Mason</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moberly, his edition of the <q>Ecclesiastical History,</q> <ref target='Pgxx'>xx</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moinenn, name for Ninias, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Moll'/>
<l>Moll, King of Northumbria, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monasteries, in England, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Gaul, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>double or mixed, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref> n., <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> n., <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> n., <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rules for, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>constitution of, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hereditary succession in, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Monasticon,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Dugdale'>Dugdale</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monk, an ungodly, his wicked life and miserable death, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his visions of hell, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monophysite Heresy, the, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monothelitism, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> n., <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref> n., <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Monumenta Historica Britannica,</q> <ref target='Pgxx'>xx</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moore, Bishop, his MS. of the <q>Ecclesiastical History,</q> <ref target='Pgxix'>xix</ref>, <ref target='Pgxx'>xx</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moray Frith, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mopsuestia, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Theodore-Theodorus'>Theodore</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morgan, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Pelagius'>Pelagius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morini, The, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mosaic Law, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Mount-Olives'/>
<l>Mount of Olives, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mount Sion, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Muigeo, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Mayo'>Mayo</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Mul'/>
<l>Mul, usurper in Kent, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Music, Church, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref> n., <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supernatural, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Naiton'/>
<l>Naiton, or Nechtan mac Derili, King of the Picts, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>adopts Catholic usages, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref>, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>asks Ceolfrid for advice and builders, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>builds a stone church, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expels the Columban clergy, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receives Ceolfrid's letter, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Namur MS. of the <q>Ecclesiastical History,</q> <ref target='Pgxix'>xix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naples, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nativity of our Lord, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Christmas'>Christmas</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nechtan mac Derili, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Naiton'>Naiton</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Nechtansmere'/>
<l>Nechtansmere, or Dunnechtan, battle of, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nendrum, or Inishmahee, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Cromanus'>Cromanus</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nennius, editorial references to, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref> n., <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> n., <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref> n., <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> n., <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nero, Emperor, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Nestorius'/>
<l>Nestorius, Bishop of Constantinople, his heresy, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> n., <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neustria, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Chilperic'>Chilperic</ref>, <ref target='Index-Clothaire-III'>Clothaire III</ref>, <ref target='Index-Clovis-II'>Clovis II</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neustrians defeated by Pippin, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Newark, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Newcastle, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicaea, Council of, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> n., <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicene Creed, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nidd, Synod of the, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ninian'/>
<l>Ninian, Ninias or Moinenn, Bishop of Whitern, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref> n., <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his mission to the Southern Picts, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Niridanum, monastery of, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nisan, the month, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n., <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nivelles, monastery of, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nola, Campania, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nola, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Paulinus-Nola'>Paulinus</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norfolk, Bishopric of, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Norman Conquest, The,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Freeman'>Freeman</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='426'/><anchor id='Pg426'/>

<lg>
<l>Northamptonshire, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n., <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref> n., <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-North-Burton'/>
<l>North Burton, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>North Pole, the, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Northumberland, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref> n., <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Northumbria, Bede's acquaintance with its history, <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>history of, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> n., <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> n., <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> n., <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref> n., <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> n., <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref> n., <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>establishment of Christianity in, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diocese of, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref> n., <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> n., <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n., <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Northumbria, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aldfrid'>Aldfrid</ref>, <ref target='Index-Alfrid'><q>Alfrid,</q></ref> <ref target='Index-Aluchred'>Aluchred</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ceolwulf'>Ceolwulf</ref>, <ref target='Index-Coenred-Northumbria'>Coenred</ref>, <ref target='Index-Eadbert-Northumbria'>Eadbert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Eadwulf'>Eadwulf</ref>, <ref target='Index-Edwin'>Edwin</ref>, <ref target='Index-Egfrid'>Egfrid</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ethelfrid'>Ethelfrid</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ethelwald-Northumbria'>Ethelwald</ref>, <ref target='Index-Moll'>Moll</ref>, <ref target='Index-Osred'>Osred</ref>, <ref target='Index-Osric-Northumbria'>Osric</ref>, <ref target='Index-Oswald'>Oswald</ref>, <ref target='Index-Oswulf'>Oswulf</ref>, <ref target='Index-Oswy'>Oswy</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Northumbria, Bishop of, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Bishops of <ref target='Index-Lindisfarne'>Lindisfarne</ref> and <ref target='Index-York'>York</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Northumbrians, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>North Wales, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norwich, the diocese of, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> n., <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Nothelm'/>
<l>Nothelm, Archbishop of Canterbury, <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his research, <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his questions to Bede answered, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nottinghamshire, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Numbers, quoted, <ref target='Pg362'>362</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oak, the (possibly Augustine's Ác), <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Octa'/>
<l>Octa, grandfather of Ethelbert, King of Kent, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oder, the river, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Odo, Archbishop of Canterbury, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oecumenical Councils, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Councils'>Councils</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Oengus'/>
<l>Oengus, Angus or Ungust, King of the Picts, son of Fergus, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> n., <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Oeric'/>
<l>Oeric, Oisc, son of Hengist, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Offa-Essex'/>
<l>Offa, King of Essex, son of Sighere, his abdication and pilgrimage to Rome, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref> n., <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Offa-Mercia'/>
<l>Offa, King of Mercia, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> n., <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> n., <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Offerings at the Altar, divisions of, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Oftfor'/>
<l>Oftfor, Bishop of Worcester, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oiddi, a priest of Wilfrid's, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Oidilwald'/>
<l>Oidilwald, sub-king of Deira, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ethelwald-Deira'>Ethelwald</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oil calms a storm, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oisc, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Oeric'>Oeric</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oiscings, the, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olivet, Mount, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Mount-Olives'>Mount of Olives</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Old Saxons, The, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref>, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Old Sarum, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Opus Paschale, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Sedulius'>Sedulius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orcades, The, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Orkneys'>Orkneys</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ordination of bishops, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Orkneys'/>
<l>Orkneys, The, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> n., <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orosius, <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> n., <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orthography, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osfrid, son of Edwin, baptized, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain in battle, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his son, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Osred'/>
<l>Osred, King of Northumbria, after Aldfrid, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref> n., <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref> n., <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>besieged in Bamborough by Eadwulf, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed in battle, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Osric-Hwiccas'/>
<l>Osric, sub-king of the Hwiccas, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Osric-Deira'/>
<l>Osric, King of Deira after Edwin, son of Aelfric, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Osric-Northumbria'/>
<l>Osric, King of Northumbria after Coenred, <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref> n., <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref> n., <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref> n., <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his parentage, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osthryth, daughter of Oswy, wife of Ethelred, King of Mercia, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her love for Bardney Monastery, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>murdered by her nobles, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='427'/><anchor id='Pg427'/>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Oswald'/>
<l>Oswald, King of Northumbria after Eanfrid and Osric, and sixth Bretwalda, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unites Bernicia and Deira, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref> n., <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>extent of his dominions, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his mother, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his victory over Caedwalla at Hefenfelth, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>erects a cross at Hefenfelth, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invites Aidan to restore Northumbria to Christianity, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>baptized, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>appoints Aidan Bishop of Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relations with Cynegils, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marries Cynegils' daughter, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>makes Birinus Bishop of Dorchester, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>finishes building St. Peter's, York, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his piety, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>church built in his honour, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>length of his reign, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain at Maserfelth, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref> n., <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burial and translation of his remains, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his arms miraculously preserved from corruption, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his posthumous miracles, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>averts a pestilence by his posthumous prayers, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legend connected with his name, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the day of his death celebrated, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Life of,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Reginald'>Reginald</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Oswalds-Tree'/>
<l>Oswald's Tree, Oswestry, or Croes Oswallt (Cross Oswald), <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Oswin-Deira'/>
<l>Oswin, King of Deira, son of Osric, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref> n., <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his love for Aidan, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his character and appearance, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his reign, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>murdered by Oswy, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>monastery built in his memory, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oswin, an Aetheling, killed by Moll, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oswinthorp, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Oswulf'/>
<l>Oswulf, King of Northumbria, son of Eadbert, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Oswy'/>
<l>Oswy, King of Bernicia and afterwards of Northumbria, seventh Bretwalda, son of Ethelfrid, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxviii'>xxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n., <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> n., <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> n., <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> n., <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>murders Oswin, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buries Oswald's head and arms, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his reign, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his dominions, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attacks upon him, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his struggle with and defeat of Penda of Mercia, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marries Eanfled, daughter of Edwin, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dedicates his daughter Elfled to a religious life, <ref target='Pgxxxiii'>xxxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his daughter Alchfled married to Peada, son of Penda, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends Cedd to convert the East Saxons, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>endows monasteries, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>instructed by the Scots, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converted to Catholic usages, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the Whitby Synod, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends Ceadda into Kent, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his conference with Egbert, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends Wighard to Rome, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his treatment of Wilfrid, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Pope Vitalian's letter to, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>intends to go to Rome, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sickness and death, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried at Whitby, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Othona, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ouestraefelda'/>
<l>Ouestraefelda (Estrefeld), Aetswinapathe, or Edwins-path, Synod of, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n., <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> n., <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Oundle'/>
<l>Oundle, or Inundalum, Monastery at, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oundle, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Cuthbald-Cudwald'>Cuthbald</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ovid, editorial reference to, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Owini, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his narrative of Ceadda's death, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oxford, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> n., <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oxford, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Paget'>Paget</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='428'/><anchor id='Pg428'/>

<lg>
<l>Padda, a priest of Wilfrid's, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paegnalaech, or Paegnalech, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Paget'/>
<l>Paget, Dr., Bishop of Oxford, his <q>Studies in the Christian Character,</q> quoted, <ref target='Pgxxxviii'>xxxviii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palestine, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pall, the, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> n., <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref> n., <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Palladius'/>
<l>Palladius, Bishop, sent by Pope Celestine to the Christian Irish, <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> n., <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pallinsburn, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palsy, girl miraculously cured of the, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pamphilus, Martyr, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pancras, or Pancratius, St., <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pant, The River, afterwards the Blackwater, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pantheon, The, given by Phocas to the Church, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paris, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paris, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Charibert'>Charibert</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paris, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Agilbert'>Agilbert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Importunus'>Importunus</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parker, editorial reference to, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parochial system, The, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Partney'/>
<l>Partney, or Peartaneu Monastery, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Partney, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aldwin-Partney'>Aldwin</ref>, <ref target='Index-Deda'>Deda</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paschal, Pope, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paschal Controversy, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Easter-Controversy'>Easter</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paschal Cycles, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Cycles'>Cycles</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Passover and Easter, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n., <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>, <ref target='Pg362'>362</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Pastoral Care, The,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Gregory-Great'>Gregory</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patriarchs, The, their tonsure, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patriarchs' tombs, The, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patrick, St., Missionary to the Irish, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref> n., <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paul, St., <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quoted, xli, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his tonsure, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>appears to a Saxon boy, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paul a Martyr, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paul the Deacon, his <q>Life of Gregory,</q> <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref> n., <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Paulinus-York'/>
<l>Paulinus, Archbishop of York, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sent by Gregory to Augustine, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>goes to Northumbria with Queen Ethelberg, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his conversion of Edwin, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converts the Northumbrians, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his ordination, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref> n., <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>baptizes Edwin's daughter Eanfled, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches and baptizes in Northumbria, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>preaches in Lindsey, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converts Blaecca of Lincoln, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>builds St. Paul's, Lincoln, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consecrates Honorius, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his appearance, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receives the pall from Pope Honorius, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converts Osric, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converts Hilda, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Edwin's death takes Ethelberg and her children back to Kent, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made Bishop of Rochester, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death and burial, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Paulinus-Nola'/>
<l>Paulinus, Bishop of Nola, his poems, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Peada'/>
<l>Peada, son of Penda, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his conversion, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made King of the South Mercians by Oswy, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n., <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his character, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marries Oswy's daughter Alchfled, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain by the treachery of his wife, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peanfahel, or Penneltun, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pearls of various colours, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peartaneu, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Partney'>Partney</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Pechthelm'/>
<l>Pechthelm, Bishop of Whitern, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n., <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelagians, The, <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Britain, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the conference of St. Albans, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their teachers confuted and expelled by Germanus, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelagius II, Pope, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Pelagius'/>
<l>Pelagius, the heretic, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> n., <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> n., <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his doctrine, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>refuted by St. Augustine, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='429'/><anchor id='Pg429'/>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Penda'/>
<l>Penda, King of Mercia, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref> n., <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his war against Edwin, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>treacherously slays Eadfrid, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his attitude towards Christianity, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his sister married to and divorced by Coinwalch, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deprives Coinwalch of his kingdom, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kills Oswald, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kills Sigbert and Ecgric in battle, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquers Lindsey, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invades and ravages Northumbria, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attempts to burn Bamborough, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burns the church where Aidan died, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his children, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain by Oswy at the Battle of Winwaed, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pentecost, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Whitsuntide'>Whitsuntide</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Perctarit'/>
<l>Perctarit, King of the Lombards, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perrona, or Péronne, Church at, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Monastery of, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> n., <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Péronne, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ultan'>Ultan</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persia, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Chosroes'>Chosroes</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peter, St., <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref>, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his tomb, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>founds the Church of Rome, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>said to have consecrated Clement, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his observance of Easter, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>monastery dedicated to, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>appears in a vision to a Saxon boy, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his wife's mother, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>church built by Naiton dedicated to, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>preaching at Rome, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his tonsure, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peter, Gregory's Deacon, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Peter-Augustines'/>
<l>Peter, first Abbot of St. Augustine's Monastery, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peter, name given to Caedwalla in his baptism, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Peterborough'/>
<l>Peterborough, or Medeshamstead, Monastery founded by Sexwulf, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peterborough, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Cuthbald-Medeshamstead'>Cuthbald</ref>, <ref target='Index-Sexwulf'>Sexwulf</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phase, or Passover, <ref target='Pg362'>362</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Philippians, Epistle to the,</q> quoted, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phocas, Emperor, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> n., <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phrygia, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Picardy, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pickering, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Picts, the, <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their law of succession, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their incursions, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref> n., <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>subdued by Oswy and made subject to Northumbria, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regain their Independence, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> n., <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeat Egfrid at Nechtansmere, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at peace with the English, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their conversion, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref> n., <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attitude towards Easter question, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Picts, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Bridius'>Bridius</ref>, <ref target='Index-Bruide-Mac-Bili'>Bruide Mac Bili</ref>, <ref target='Index-Naiton'>Naiton</ref>, <ref target='Index-Oengus'>Oengus</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Picts, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Trumwine'>Trumwine</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pilgrimages, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref> n., <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pilgrim of Bordeaux, The, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pincahala, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Pippin-Heristal'/>
<l>Pippin of Heristal, Duke of the Franks, account of, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his kindness to Wilbrord, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buries the Hewalds, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gives Suidbert land for a monastery at Inlitore, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Pippin-Short'/>
<l>Pippin the Short, King of the Franks, son of Charles Martel, grandson of Pippin of Heristal, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref> n., <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Placidia, Mother of Valentinian, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plague, The, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxviii'>xxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxv'>xxxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n., <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref> n., <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref> n., <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref> n., <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref> n., <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plato, quoted, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plectrude, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Blithryda'>Blithryda</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pliny, <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Plummer'/>
<l>Plummer, editorial references to his edition of the <q>Ecclesiastical History</q> and Historical Works of Bede, <ref target='Pgv'>v</ref>, <ref target='Pgxix'>xix</ref>, <ref target='Pgxx'>xx</ref>, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> n.,
<pb n='430'/><anchor id='Pg430'/>
<ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> n., <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> n., <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref> n., <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n., <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> n., <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> n., <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref> n., <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref> n., <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref> n., <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref> n., <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref> n., <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poetry, English Religious, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Latin, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poitiers, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Fortunatus'>Fortunatus</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pontifical System of Indictions, The, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> n., <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pontus, The, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Praetorian Guards, The, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Praise of Virgins, The,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Fortunatus'>Fortunatus</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priestfield, Rochester, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Primacy, The, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priscilla, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Promised Land, The, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Prosper'/>
<l>Prosper of Aquitaine, <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quoted, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prosper Tiro, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Psalms, The,</q> quoted, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Puch, a thegn, his wife healed by John of Beverley, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Putta-Rochester'/>
<l>Putta, Bishop of Rochester, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the Hertford Synod, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leaves Rochester for Mercia, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his unworldliness, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches Church music, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Putta-Hereford'/>
<l>Putta, Bishop of Hereford, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purgatory, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref>, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref>, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quartodecimans, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n., <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref> n., <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref> n., <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quenburga, daughter of Cearl, first wife of Edwin, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quentavic, Quentae vicus, or Etaples, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Etaples'>Etaples</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quodvultdeus, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quoenburg, daughter of Heriburg, healed by the prayers of Bishop John of Beverley, <ref target='Pg305'>305-307</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Racuulfe, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Reculver-Racuulfe'>Reculver</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Raedfrid, Egbert's reeve, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Raegenheri, son of Redwald, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rameses, <ref target='Pg362'>362</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ramsbury, Diocese of, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rathbed, King of Frisland, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rathmelsigi, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ravenna, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rebecca's Tomb, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref> n., <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Reculver-Racuulfe'/>
<l>Reculver or Racuulfe, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reculver, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Bertwald'>Bertwald</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Redbridge'/>
<l>Redbridge, Ford of Reeds, or Hreutford, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Redbridge, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Cynibert-Redbridge'>Cynibert</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Redger'/>
<l>Redger, Archbishop of Maintz, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Redwald'/>
<l>Redwald, King of the East Angles, fourth Bretwalda, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his protection of Edwin, <ref target='Pg112'>112-115</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leads an army against Ethelfrid, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>banishes Sigbert, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his conversion and perversion, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his genealogy, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his Queen, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Reeves'/>
<l>Reeves, Dr., editorial reference to his <q>Culdees,</q> <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to his edition of Adamnan's <q>Life of St. Columba,</q> <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> n., <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Reginald'/>
<l>Reginald of Durham, editorial references to his <q>Life of St. Oswald,</q> <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> n., <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Religious Orders, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rendlesham, Rendlaesham or Rendil's Dwelling, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reppington, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Repton'>Repton</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reptacaestir, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Richborough'>Richborough</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reptiles, their absence from Ireland, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Repton'/>
<l>Repton or Reppington, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Responsa, Gregory's, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Gregory-Great'>Gregory's Answers</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Restennet, near Forfar, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Resurrection, Doctrine of the, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Retford, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Reuda'/>
<l>Reuda, leader of the Scots, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhine, the River, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref>, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhŷs, Dr., editorial references to his <q>Celtic Britain,</q> vi, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref> n., <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> n., <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref> n., <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref> n., <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref> n., <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> n., <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='431'/><anchor id='Pg431'/>

<lg>
<l>Riada, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Reuda'>Reuda</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Richard of Hexham, editorial references to, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> n., <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Richborough'/>
<l>Richborough, Reptacaestir or Rutubi Portus, Kent, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Richmond, Yorks., <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ricula, sister of Ethelbert, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ricbert kills Earpwald, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ripon'/>
<l>Ripon, or Inhrypum, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Monastery of, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref> n., <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> n., <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> n., <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref> n., <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref> n., <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> n., <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diocese of, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> n., <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ripon, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Eadhaed'>Eadhaed</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ripon, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Wilfrid-St'>Wilfrid</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ritual, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Rochester'/>
<l>Rochester, Dorubrevis, Hrofaescaestrae or The Kentish Castle, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> n., <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diocese of, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rochester, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aldwulf-Rochester'>Aldwulf</ref>, <ref target='Index-Cuichelm-Rochester'>Cuichelm</ref>, <ref target='Index-Damian'>Damian</ref>, <ref target='Index-Gebmund'>Gebmund</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ithamar'>Ithamar</ref>, <ref target='Index-Justus'>Justus</ref>, <ref target='Index-Paulinus-York'>Paulinus</ref>, <ref target='Index-Putta-Rochester'>Putta</ref>, <ref target='Index-Romanus-Rochester'>Romanus</ref>, <ref target='Index-Tobias'>Tobias</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roger of Wendover, editorial references to, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref> n., <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roman Law, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roman remains at Grantchester, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romans, The, in Britain, <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pg009'>9-23</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Rome'/>
<l>Rome, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref> n., <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> n., <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> n., <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n., <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref>, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref>, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bede's alleged visit to, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken by the Goths, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Apostolic see of, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>councils held at, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref> n., <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> n., <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Romanus-Rochester'/>
<l>Romanus, Bishop of Rochester after Justus, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>drowned on his way to Rome, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romanus, a priest of Queen Eanfled's, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romulus, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romulus Augustulus, Emperor, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ronan, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rosemarkie, on the Moray Frith, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rowley Water, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Rufinianus'/>
<l>Rufinianus, Abbot of St. Augustine's Monastery, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rügen, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rügenwalde, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rugii, the, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rugini, the, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rutubi Portus, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Richborough'>Richborough</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Saba'/>
<l>Saba, or Sabert, King of Essex, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his pagan sons, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pgxxiv'>xxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrarium, Signification of, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sacrilege'/>
<l>Sacrilege, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrifice of Animals, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Saethryth'/>
<l>Saethryth, Abbess of Brige, step-daughter of Anna, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> n., <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saewulf, quoted, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Abb's Head, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Agnes' Convent, Rome, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-St-Albans'/>
<l>St. Alban's, Vaeclingacaestir, Verlamacaestir, or Verulam, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Monastery of, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conference at, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Amphibalus, Church of, at Winchester, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Andrew's Church, Hexham, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Andrew's, Rochester, built by Ethelbert, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Andrew's Monastery, Rome, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Audrey's Fair, Ely, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Audrey's Lace, or Tawdry Lace, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-St-Augustines'/>
<l>St. Augustine's Monastery, (Monastery of SS. Peter and Paul), founded by Augustine, at Canterbury, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> n., <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref> n., <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> n., <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Augustine and subsequent archbishops buried there, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Augustine's, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Albinus'>Albinus</ref>, <ref target='Index-Benedict-Biscop'>Benedict</ref>, <ref target='Index-Hadrian-Abbot'>Hadrian</ref>, <ref target='Index-Peter-Augustines'>Peter</ref>, <ref target='Index-Rufinianus'>Rufinianus</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Bees, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Boswells, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='432'/><anchor id='Pg432'/>

<lg>
<l>St. Cecilia in Trastevere, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Cunibert's Church, Cologne, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Ebbe's Church, Oxford, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Gallen, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its MS. of Cuthbert's Letter to Cuthwin, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Cuthbert-Wearmouth'>Cuthbert</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Gregory's Chapel in St. Peter's, York, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Herbert's Island, Derwentwater, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. John's Lee, Hexham, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Lawrence's Church, Bradford-on-Avon, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Martin of Tours, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Martin's Church, Canterbury, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Martin's Church, Tours, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Martin's Church, Utrecht, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Martin's Church, Whitern, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Martin's Monastery, Rome, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Martin's, Rome, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-John-Precentor'>John</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Mary's Church, Bethlehem, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Mary's Church, Lichfield, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Michael's Church, Malmesbury, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Michael's Oratory, Erneshow, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Oswald's, near Hexham, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Pancras Church, Canterbury, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Paul's Cathedral, London, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Paul's Church, Rome, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Peter, the patrimony of, in Gaul, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Peter's Church, Bamborough, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Peter's Church, Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Peter's Church, Ripon, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Peter's, Rome, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Peter's Church, Whitby, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Peter's Church, York, now York Minster, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>SS. Peter and Paul, Church and Monastery of, Canterbury, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> n., <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-St-Augustines'>St. Augustine's</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>SS. Peter and Paul, Church of, at Dorchester, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>SS. Peter and Paul, Church of, at Winchester, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>SS. Peter and Paul, monastery of, at Wearmouth and Jarrow, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Wearmouth-Jarrow'>Wearmouth</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Saviour's Church, Utrecht, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Stephen's Church, Faremoûtier-en-Brie, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Santi Quattro Coronati, Church of, at Rome, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>S. Lorenzo fuori le Mura, Rome, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saracens, The, <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>; origin of, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sarah's Tomb, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref> n., <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saranus, or Saran Ua Critain, Irish Ecclesiastic, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saul, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saxon, the name, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Saxon Chronicle, The,</q> editorial references to, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref> n., <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> n., <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref> n., <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref> n., <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saxons, The, <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called in to help the Britons, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquer Britain, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>settled in Britain, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saxony, Old, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scandinavia, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref> n., <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scarborough, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scarlet Dye made from snails, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scellanus, Irish priest, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schleswig, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schools, founded by Sigbert, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Gaul, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> n., <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Kent, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> n., <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scotland, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ireland'>Ireland</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scottia, signification of, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scottish Language, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scots, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, Irish, <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>incursions of, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref> n., <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christianity among, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>,
<pb n='433'/><anchor id='Pg433'/>
<ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their observance of Easter, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expelled from England, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Dalriada, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> n., <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scots, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aedan'>Aedan</ref>, <ref target='Index-Conall'>Conall</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scott, Sir W., editorial reference to his <q>Antiquary,</q> <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scylla, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scythia, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seals in Britain, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sebbi'/>
<l>Sebbi, Joint King of Essex, brother of Sigbert the Little, <ref target='Pgxxviii'>xxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his piety, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his queen, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>retires into a monastery, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his vision, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burial, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>posthumous miracle, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sedulius'/>
<l>Sedulius, author of <q>Carmen Paschale,</q> and <q>Opus Paschale,</q> <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Segeni'/>
<l>Segeni, Abbot of Iona, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Segenus, Irish priest, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Selaeseu, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Selsey'>Selsey</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Selred, King of the East Saxons, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Selsey'/>
<l>Selsey, Selaeseu, or the Island of the Sea-calf, monastery at, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diocese of, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> n., <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Selsey, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Eadbert-Selsey'>Eadbert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Eolla'>Eolla</ref>, <ref target='Index-Sigfrid'>Sigfrid</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Selsey, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Eappa'>Eappa</ref>, <ref target='Index-Eadbert-Selsey'>Eadbert</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Senlis, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Liudhard'>Liudhard</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Senones, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sens, Archbishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Emme'>Emme</ref>, <ref target='Index-Wulfram'>Wulfram</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sepulchre, The Holy, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sergius I, Pope, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serpent, the Devil, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Severianus, St., <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Severianus, Pelagian Bishop, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Severinus, Pope, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Severn, The river, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Severus, Emperor, divides Britain by a rampart, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his government of Britain, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Severus-Treves'/>
<l>Severus, Bishop of Trèves, accompanies Germanus to Britain, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sexbald of Essex, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sexburg-Anna'/>
<l>Sexburg, daughter of Anna, wife of Earconbert, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> n., <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Abbess of Ely and of Sheppey, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>acts as regent, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>translates Ethelthryth's bones, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sexburg, wife of Coinwalch, reigns in Wessex, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sexwulf'/>
<l>Sexwulf, Abbot of Medeshamstead, afterwards Bishop of Mercia, in place of Wynfrid, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> n., <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expelled from Mercia, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sheppey, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sheppey, Abbess of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ermingild'>Ermingild</ref>, <ref target='Index-Sexburg-Anna'>Sexburg</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sherborne, Diocese of, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sherborne, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aldhelm'>Aldhelm</ref>, <ref target='Index-Forthere-Sherborne'>Forthere</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sidnacaestir, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sigbert-Anglia'/>
<l>Sigbert, King of East Anglia, half-brother to Earpwald, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>driven into exile by Redwald, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> n., <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>returns home, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>restores Christianity in East Anglia, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his piety and good works, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>abdicates and retires into a monastery, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>drawn out to lead his people against the Mercians, and killed in battle, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sigbert-Good'/>
<l>Sigbert the Good, King of Essex, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sigbert the Little, King of Essex, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sigfrid'/>
<l>Sigfrid, Bishop of Selsey, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref> n., <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sighard'/>
<l>Sighard, King of Essex, son of Sebbi, reigns jointly with his brother Suefred, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sighere'/>
<l>Sighere, Joint King of Essex, son of Sigbert the Little, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='434'/><anchor id='Pg434'/>

<lg>
<l>Simeon of Durham, editorial references to, <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxl'>xl</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> n., <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> n., <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref> n., <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref> n., <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref> n., <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref> n., <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> n., <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref> n., <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simoniacs, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simon Magus, his tonsure, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>, <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref>, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sinai, Mount, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sirmium, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sister-in-law, marriage with a, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Skene'/>
<l>Skene, editorial references to his <q>Celtic Scotland,</q> <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> n., <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref> n., <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slack (perhaps Campodonum), <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slave Market at Rome, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slaves, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref> n., <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, his edition of the <q>Ecclesiastical History,</q> editorial references to, <ref target='Pgxix'>xix</ref>, <ref target='Pgxx'>xx</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref> n., <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref> n., <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref> n., <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Snails, dye made from, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Snakes, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soissons, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Solent'/>
<l>Solent, or Solvente, The, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solinus, <ref target='Pgxxii'>xxii</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solvente, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Solent'>Solent</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solway, The, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> n., <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Somerset, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Southampton, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Southampton Water, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>South Brabant, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-South-Burton'/>
<l>South Burton, now Bishop Burton, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>South Downs, the, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Southern Gyrwas, locality of, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ealdorman of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Tondbert'>Tondbert</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>South Mercia, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Peada'>Peada</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>South Saxons, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diocese of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Selsey'>Selsey</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kingdom of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Sussex'>Sussex</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>South Wales, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Southwell, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spain, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Church of, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref> n., <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Springs, salt and hot, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Staffordshire, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stamford, Lincs., <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stamford Bridge, Yorks., <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stanford, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stapleton, Thomas, his translation of the <q>Ecclesiastical History,</q> <ref target='Pgxxi'>xxi</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stephen, St., <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stephen III, Pope, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref> n., <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stephen, surname of Eddius, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stepmother, marriage with a, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stevens, John, his translation of the <q>Ecclesiastical History,</q> <ref target='Pgv'>v</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxi'>xxi</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Stevenson'/>
<l>Stevenson, editorial references to his edition of the <q>Ecclesiastical History,</q> <ref target='Pgxx'>xx</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to his <q>Church Historians,</q> <ref target='Pgxl'>xl</ref>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stevenson, W. H., editorial reference to, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stigmata, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Stokes'/>
<l>Stokes, Margaret, editorial reference to her <q>Three Months in the Forests of France,</q> <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stonar, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stone, used in building churches, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Stoneham'/>
<l>Stoneham, or At the Stone, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stour, the river, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stow, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strathclyde, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> n., <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> n., <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> n., <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> n., <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Streanaeshalch, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, and <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Whitby-Bay'>Whitby</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stubbs, editorial references to his <q>Constitutional History,</q> <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> n., <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to his articles in <q>Dictionary of Christian Biography,</q> <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref> n., <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Haddan-Stubbs'>Haddan and Stubbs</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Studies in the Christian Character,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Paget'>Paget</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Suaebhard'/>
<l>Suaebhard, Joint King of Kent, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref> n., <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> n., <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sudergeona (Surrey), <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Suefred'/>
<l>Suefred, or Swefred, King of Essex, son of Sebbi, reigns jointly with his brother Sighard, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>grants land at Twickenham to Waldhere, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='435'/><anchor id='Pg435'/>

<lg>
<l>Suevi, the, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suffolk, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref> n., <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> n., <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> n., <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> n., <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bishopric of, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Suidbert-Abbot'/>
<l>Suidbert, Abbot of Dacre, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suidbert, St., <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Suidhelm'/>
<l>Suidhelm, King of Essex after Sigbert, son of Sexwald, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Supernatural Appearances, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fragrance, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>and see</hi> <ref target='Index-Visions'>Visions</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Surnames, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Surrey, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> n., <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sussex'/>
<l>Sussex, History, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n., <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> n., <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sussex, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aelli'>Aelli</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ethelwalch'>Ethelwalch</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swale, the river, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swefred, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Suefred'>Suefred</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sylvester, St., <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Symmachus, Pope, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Synods'/>
<l>Synods, or Councils, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxviii'>xxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> n., <ref target='Pg195'>195-201</ref>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref> n., <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n., <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref> n., <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rules for, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Synodical Epistle, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Gregory-Great'>Gregory</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syria, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tacitus, editorial references to, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref> n., <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tadcaster, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tanfield (perhaps Campodonum), <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tarsus, Cilicia, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> n., <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tata, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Ethelberg-Tata'>Ethelberg</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Tatfrid'/>
<l>Tatfrid, bishop elect of the Hwiccas, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Tatwine'/>
<l>Tatwine, a priest of Bredon, afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury, <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tawdry, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tecla, St., <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tees, the river, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Temples, Heathen, to be converted into churches, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to be destroyed, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>half Christian and half heathen, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Testry, battle of, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thame, the river, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thames, the river, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n., <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> n., <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thanet, Isle of, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> n., <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theft, Sacrilegious, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Sacrilege'>Sacrilege</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theium, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodbald, brother of Ethelfrid, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Theodebert'/>
<l>Theodebert, King of Austrasia, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Theoderic'/>
<l>Theoderic, King of Burgundy, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Theodore-Archbishop'/>
<l>Theodore, of Tarsus, Archbishop of Canterbury, <ref target='Pgxxviii'>xxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> n., <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref> n., <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> n., <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> n., <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> n., <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his journey to Britain, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>arrival, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordination and consecration, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his learning, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his subdivision of bishoprics, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref> n., <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref> n., <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> n., <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dedicates St. Peter's, Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his tonsure, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his visitation, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his teaching, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bishops consecrated by him, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presides at the Synod of Hertford, <ref target='Pg226'>226-231</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Hatfield, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Twyford, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his quarrel and reconciliation with Wilfrid, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref> n., <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> n., <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> n., <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reconciles Egfrid and Ethelred, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on blood-letting, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his decrees of 678, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>length of his episcopate, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>foretells the length of his life, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burial, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his epitaph, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his character, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Theodore-Theodorus'/>
<l>Theodore, or Theodorus, Bishop of Mopsuestia, heretic, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> n., <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodore, the name, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Theodoret'/>
<l>Theodoret, Bishop of Cyrus, heretic, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> n., <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodorus, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Theodore-Theodorus'>Theodore</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodosius the Great, Emperor, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='436'/><anchor id='Pg436'/>

<lg>
<l>Theodosius, father of Theodosius the Great, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodosius the Younger, Emperor, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Theophilus'/>
<l>Theophilus, Archbishop of Alexandria, his Paschal computation, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thetford, Diocese of, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Theudor'/>
<l>Theudor, King of the Britons of Strathclyde, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Thomas-Anglia'/>
<l>Thomas, Bishop of East Anglia after Felix, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref> n., <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomas of Elmham, editorial references to, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> n., <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thrace, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Three Months in the Forests of France,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Stokes'>Stokes</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Thruidred'/>
<l>Thruidred, Abbot of Dacre, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thuuf, or Tufa, a banner, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thrydwulf, Abbot, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiberius Constantine, Emperor, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiburtina, Via, Rome, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Tighernach, Annals of,</q> editorial references to, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> n., <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tilbury, or Tilaburg, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Till, The River, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tilmon, his vision of the Hewalds, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Timothy, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>The Epistle to,</q> quoted, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Tininghame'/>
<l>Tininghame, or Intiningaham, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiowulfingacaestir, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Titillus, Theodore's notary, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Tobias'/>
<l>Tobias, Bishop of Rochester, disciple of Theodore and Hadrian, <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his learning, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> n., <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burial, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toledo, Council of, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Tomene'/>
<l>Tomene, or Tomianus, Abbot and Bishop of Armagh, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Tondbert'/>
<l>Tondbert, first husband of Ethelthryth, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tondhere, Oswin's thegn, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tonsure, the, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref> n., <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg370'>370-373</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tours, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> n., <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>battle of, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tours, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Martin-Tours'>Martin</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Torksey, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tortgyth, a nun of Barking, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Torthere'/>
<l>Torthere, Bishop of Hereford, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tovecester, or Towcester, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trajectum, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Wiltaburg'>Wiltaburg</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trent, The River, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref> n., <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the battle of the, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trèves, or the Treveri, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trèves, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Severus-Treves'>Severus</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trinity, Invocation of the, <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trinovantes, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tripolis, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Troyes, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Lupus'>Lupus</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trumbert, one of Bede's teachers, his account of Ceadda, <ref target='Pgxxxv'>xxxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Trumhere'/>
<l>Trumhere, Abbot of Gilling, Bishop of Mid-Anglia and Mercia, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Trumwine'/>
<l>Trumwine, Bishop of the Picts, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>retires to Whitby, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> n., <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assists Elfled with his counsels, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the Synod of Twyford, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death and burial at Whitby, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tuam, Archbishopric of, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Tuda'/>
<l>Tuda, Bishop of Lindisfarne after Colman, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dies of the Plague, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried at Paegnalaech, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Tunbert'/>
<l>Tunbert, Abbot of Gilling, Bishop of Hexham, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>appointed and deposed by Theodore, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tunna, Abbot of Tunnacaestir, his prayers miraculously release his brother Imma, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tunnacaestir, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tweed, The River (<q>Tuidi flumen</q>), <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref> n., <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Twickenham, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Twyford'/>
<l>Twyford, Adtuifyrdi, or At the Two Fords, Synod at, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyne, The River, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> n., <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> n., <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref> n., <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tynemouth, Monasteries at, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='437'/><anchor id='Pg437'/>

<lg>
<l>Tynemouth, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Herebald'>Herebald</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Tyrhtel'/>
<l>Tyrhtel, Bishop of Hereford, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Tytilus'/>
<l>Tytilus, father of Redwald, King of East Anglia, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ulster, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Ulster, the Annals of,</q> editorial references to, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref> n., <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ultan'/>
<l>Ultan, a hermit, Abbot of Fosse and Péronne, brother of Fursa, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Undalum, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Oundle'>Oundle</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Urbs Giudi, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Urbs Iudeu, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Utrecht, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref> n., <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Utrecht, Archbishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Wilbrord'>Wilbrord</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Utta'/>
<l>Utta, Abbot of Gateshead, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sent to fetch Eanfled from Kent, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>calms a storm with oil, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Uuffa'/>
<l>Uuffa, grandfather of Redwald, King of East Anglia, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uuffings, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, Kings of East Anglia, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uurtigern, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Vortigern'>Vortigern</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vaeclingacaestir, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-St-Albans'>St. Albans</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valens, Emperor, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valentinian II, Emperor, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expelled from Italy, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>restored, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kills Maximus, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valentinian III, Emperor, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>murders Aetius, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref> n., <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>murdered, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valerian, Emperor, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vandals, the, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vecta, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Venantius Fortunatus, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Fortunatus'>Fortunatus</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Venta, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Winchester'>Winchester</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Vergil'/>
<l>Vergil, quoted, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Vergilius'/>
<l>Vergilius, Archbishop of Arles, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> n., <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Verlamacaestir, or Verulam, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-St-Albans'>St. Albans</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vespasian conquers the Isle of Wight, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vestments, Ecclesiastical, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Viaticum, the, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref> n., <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Victgilsus, Father of Hengist and Horsa, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Victorinus, St., <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Victorius, or Victorinus of Aquitaine, his Paschal Cycle, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vienne, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vines in Britain, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Ireland, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Vergil'>Vergil</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virginity, poem in honour of, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Aldhelm's work on, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref> n., <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Visions'/>
<l>Visions, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref>, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seen by Adamnan, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by Begu, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by a nun at Whitby, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by Bregusuid, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by Caedmon, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by Drythelm, <ref target='Pg325'>325-331</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Barking, <ref target='Pg232'>232-237</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by Earcongota, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by Edwin, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by a disciple of Boisil, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by Fursa, <ref target='Pg173'>173-177</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by Sebbi, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by Theodore, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by Tilmon, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by Wilfrid, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vitalian, Pope, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> n., <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his letter to Oswy, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>seeks a suitable Archbishop for Canterbury, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordains Theodore, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends Theodore and Hadrian to Britain, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vitta, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Voyage Provision, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the Viaticum, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Vortigern'/>
<l>Vortigern, or Uurtigern, King of Britain, calls in the Saxons, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vulgate, the, quoted, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pg361'>361-372</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wagele, perhaps Whalley, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Wahlstod'/>
<l>Wahlstod, Bishop of Hereford, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walbottle, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Waldhere'/>
<l>Waldhere, Bishop of London, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wales, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wall, At the, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='438'/><anchor id='Pg438'/>

<lg>
<l>Walls, Roman, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wallsend-on-Tyne, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walton, near Newcastle, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wantsum, the River, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wash, the, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Watling Street, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> n., <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Watton'/>
<l>Watton, Betendune, or Wetadun, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Watton, Abbess of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Heriburg'>Heriburg</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Welsh, The, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref> n., <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wear, The River, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Wearmouth-Jarrow'/>
<l>Wearmouth and Jarrow, Monastery, of, <ref target='Pgxxiii'>xxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxiii'>xxxiii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxiv'>xxxiv</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxv'>xxxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref> n., <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its library, <ref target='Pgxxxv'>xxxv</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wearmouth and Jarrow, Abbot of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Benedict-Biscop'>Benedict</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ceolfrid'>Ceolfrid</ref>, <ref target='Index-Cuthbert-Wearmouth'>Cuthbert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Huaetbert'>Huaetbert</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Went, the River, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wergild, the, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Wessex'/>
<l>Wessex, History of, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref> n., <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> n., <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref> n., <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> n., <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diocese of, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> n., <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wessex, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aescwine'>Aescwine</ref>, <ref target='Index-Caedwalla-Wessex'>Caedwalla</ref>, <ref target='Index-Caelin'>Caelin</ref>, <ref target='Index-Centwine'>Centwine</ref>, <ref target='Index-Coinwalch'>Coinwalch</ref>, <ref target='Index-Cuichelm-Wessex'>Cuichelm</ref>, <ref target='Index-Cuthred'>Cuthred</ref>, <ref target='Index-Cynegils'>Cynegils</ref>, <ref target='Index-Cyniwulf'>Cyniwulf</ref>, <ref target='Index-Edilhart'>Edilhart</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ini'>Ini</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wessex, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Agilbert'>Agilbert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Birinus'>Birinus</ref>, <ref target='Index-Daniel'>Daniel</ref>, <ref target='Index-Haedde'>Haedde</ref>, <ref target='Index-Leutherius'>Leutherius</ref>, <ref target='Index-Wini'>Wini</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westphalia, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-West-Saxons'/>
<l>West Saxons, called Gewissae or Gewissi, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>history and province of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Wessex'>Wessex</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wetadun, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Watton'>Watton</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whales in Britain, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whalley, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wharfe, The River, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whelock, Abraham, his edition of the <q>Ecclesiastical History,</q> <ref target='Pgxix'>xix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Whitby-Bay'/>
<l>Whitby, Bay of the Lighthouse or Streanaeshalch, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> n., <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>monastery of, built by Hilda, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n., <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> n., <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272-281</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref> n., <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Synod of, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxviii'>xxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n., <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> n., <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196-201</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whitby, Abbess of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Eanfled'>Eanfled</ref>, <ref target='Index-Elfled'>Elfled</ref>, <ref target='Index-Hilda'>Hilda</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Whitby-Monk'/>
<l>Whitby, a monk of, editorial references to his <q>Life of Gregory,</q> <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref> n., <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whitern or White House, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diocese of, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whitern, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Frithwald'>Frithwald</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ninian'>Ninian</ref>, <ref target='Index-Pechthelm'>Pechthelm</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Whitsuntide'/>
<l>Whitsuntide, <ref target='Pgxli'>xli</ref> n., <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whittingham, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wicklow, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wictbert, Irish hermit, his unsuccessful mission to Frisland, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Wictred'/>
<l>Wictred, King of Kent, son of Egbert, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxxi'>xxxi</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his sons, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>, <ref target='Pg386'>386</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wighard, a disciple of Gregory's, sent to Rome to be ordained Archbishop, dies there, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Wight'/>
<l>Wight, Isle of, history, <ref target='Pgxxix'>xxix</ref>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christianity introduced into, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>described, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bishopric of, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wight, the Isle of, King of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Arwald'>Arwald</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wigton Bay, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilbert, a boy to whom Bede dictates the last sentences of his translations, <ref target='Pgxliii'>xliii</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Wilbrord'/>
<l>Wilbrord, Missionary, Archbishop of Frisland, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref> n., <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref> n., <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Rome, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his mission to Frisland, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref> n., <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>destroys idols and kills the sacred cattle of Fosite, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his consecration, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>given the name of Clement in religion, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his see at Utrecht, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his monastery near Trèves, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>calendar said to contain an entry by him, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>builds St. Saviour's, and rebuilds St.
<pb n='439'/><anchor id='Pg439'/>
Martin's Church, Utrecht, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>date of his death, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Life of,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Alcuin'>Alcuin</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilfaraesdun or Wilfar's Hill, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Wilfrid-St'/>
<l>Wilfrid, St., Bishop, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref> n., <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref> n., <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> n., <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of his life and character, <ref target='Pg347'>347-357</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his birth and family, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>educated at Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sent to the Court of Oswy, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>resolves to go to Rome, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assisted by Queen Eanfled, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref>, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>starts with Benedict Biscop, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>detained at Lyons by Annemundus, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Rome, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on his way home stays at Lyons, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his fidelity to Annemundus, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wins the friendship of Alchfrid, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>given land at Stanford, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made Abbot of Ripon, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the Whitby Synod, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195-200</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made Bishop of Northumbria, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consecrated in Gaul by Agilbert, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superseded by Ceadda, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref> n., <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>returns to Britain, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>shipwrecked on the coast of Sussex, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>discharges episcopal functions for Mercia and Kent, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> n., <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>restored by Theodore, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relations with Ethelthryth, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> n., <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relations with Theodore, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref> n., <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> n., <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> n., <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> n., <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented at Hertford by proxy, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his Catholic teaching, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invites Eddi from Kent to teach church singing, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expelled from his see by Egfrid, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n., <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> n., <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>foretells the battle of the Trent, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>demands an explanation from the King and Archbishop, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>goes to Rome to plead his cause, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n., <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ebroin's plot against his life, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> n., <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on his way to Rome driven by the wind to Frisland, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>visits Dagobert II of Austrasia, and Perctarit, King of the Lombards, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>acquitted by Agatho and the Lateran Council, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his confession of faith on behalf of the English Church, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref> n., <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>returns to Britain, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>, accused of bribery, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imprisoned at Bromnis, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Dunbar, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>released at Aebba's request, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> n., <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>takes refuge in Mercia, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> n., <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expelled from Mercia, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> n., <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>converts the South Saxons and the Isle of Wight, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> n., <ref target='Pg245'>245-248</ref>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>founds the Monastery of Selsey, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his restoration to York, Hexham, and Ripon, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n., <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref> n., <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> n., <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>administers Lindisfarne, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his second expulsion, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref> n., <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref> n., <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>second sojourn in Mercia, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consecrates Oftfor, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consecrates Suidbert, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>excommunicated by the Council of Ouestraefelda, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>second visit to Frisland, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>again goes to Rome to plead his cause, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>acquitted by Pope John and the Council, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken ill at Meaux on his way back to Britain, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his vision, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>arrives in Britain, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reconciled to Bertwald, Ethelred and Coenred, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Aldfrid refuses to receive him, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Elfled's influence in his favour, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>restored to his bishopric of Hexham by the Synod on the Nidd, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dies at Oundle, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried at St. Peter's, Ripon, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his epitaph, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>length of his episcopate, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relics, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his character, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>churches built by him, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Life of,</q> <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Eddi'>Eddius</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='440'/><anchor id='Pg440'/>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Wilfrid-II'/>
<l>Wilfrid II, Bishop of York, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref> n., <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref> n., <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordained by John, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Wilfrid-Worcester'/>
<l>Wilfrid, Bishop of Worcester, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilgils, father of Wilbrord, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>William III, <ref target='Pgxix'>xix</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-William'/>
<l>William of Malmesbury, editorial references to, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> n., <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref> n., <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref> n., <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> n., <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref> n., <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref> n., <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref> n., <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref> n., <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Wiltaburg'/>
<l>Wiltaburg, Wiltenburg, the Town of the Wilts, or Trajectum, now Utrecht, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiltshire, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wincanheale, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Winchester'/>
<l>Winchester, Venta, or Wintancaestir, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>churches at, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diocese of, <ref target='Pgxxvi'>xxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxx'>xxx</ref>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> n., <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> n., <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winchester, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Daniel'>Daniel</ref>, <ref target='Index-Haedde'>Haedde</ref>, <ref target='Index-Leutherius'>Leutherius</ref>, <ref target='Index-Wini'>Wini</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winfrid, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> Boniface.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Wini'/>
<l>Wini, Bishop of Winchester, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consecrates Ceadda, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>expelled from Winchester, purchases the bishopric of London, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>returns to Winchester, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wintancaestir, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Winchester'>Winchester</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Winter's Tale, The,</q> editorial reference to, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winwaed, Battle of the, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> n., <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winwaed, The River, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witberg, daughter of Anna, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witenagemot, The, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref> n., <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> n., <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> n., <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> n., <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Woden, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the sons of, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wooler, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Worcester'/>
<l>Worcester, diocese of the Hwiccas, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref> n., <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n., <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Worcester, Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Bosel'>Bosel</ref>, <ref target='Index-Egwin'>Egwin</ref>, <ref target='Index-Oftfor'>Oftfor</ref>, <ref target='Index-Tatfrid'>Tatfrid</ref>, <ref target='Index-Wilfrid-Worcester'>Wilfrid</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Worcestershire, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> n., <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Worr, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Aldwin-Worr'>Aldwin</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Wulfhere'/>
<l>Wulfhere, King of Mercia, son of Penda, <ref target='Pgxxvii'>xxvii</ref>, <ref target='Pgxxviii'>xxviii</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> n., <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref> n., <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref> n., <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref> n., <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with the aid of Immin, Eafa, and Eadbert, recovers Mercia from Oswy, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his reign, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his realm, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conquers Lindsey, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sends Jaruman to the East Saxons, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brings about the conversion of Ethelwalch, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>endows monasteries, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invades Northumbria, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>defeated by Egfrid, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref> n., <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref> n., <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Wulfram'/>
<l>Wulfram, St., Archbishop of Sens, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wuscfrea, son of Edwin, baptized, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>taken by his mother into Kent, and sent into Gaul, where he dies in infancy, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Wynfrid'/>
<l>Wynfrid, Bishop of Lichfield, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>account of, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deacon under Ceadda, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the Hertford Synod, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deposed by Theodore, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>retires to Ad Barvae, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Yeavering'/>
<l>Yeavering or Adgefrin, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yellow pest, a bubonic plague, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Yffi-Deira'/>
<l>Yffi, first King of Deira, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yffi, son of Osfrid, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-York'/>
<l>York, <ref target='Pgxxxvi'>xxxvi</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>diocese of, <ref target='Pgxxv'>xxv</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> n., <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> n.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cathedral, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>York, Archbishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Egbert-York'>Egbert</ref>, <ref target='Index-Paulinus-York'>Paulinus</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bishop of, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Bosa'>Bosa</ref>, <ref target='Index-Ceadda'>Ceadda</ref>, <ref target='Index-John-Beverley'>John</ref>, <ref target='Index-Wilfrid-St'>Wilfrid</ref>, <ref target='Index-Wilfrid-II'>Wilfrid II</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yorkshire, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> n., <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref> n., <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> n., <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref> n., <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ythancaestir, Monastery of, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zacharias, Pope, letter to Boniface, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zeuss, his <q>Die Deutschen und die Nachbarstämme,</q> <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zozimus, Pope, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> n.</l>
</lg>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
